FIRST ACT


SCENE


Morning-room in Algernon's flat in Half-Moon Street.  The room is
luxuriously and artistically furnished.  The sound of a piano is heard in
the adjoining room.

[Lane is arranging afternoon tea on the table, and after the music has
ceased, Algernon enters.]

Algernon.  Did you hear what I was playing, Lane?

Lane.  I didn't think it polite to listen, sir.

Algernon.  I'm sorry for that, for your sake.  I don't play
accurately--any one can play accurately--but I play with wonderful
expression.  As far as the piano is concerned, sentiment is my forte.  I
keep science for Life.

Lane.  Yes, sir.

Algernon.  And, speaking of the science of Life, have you got the
cucumber sandwiches cut for Lady Bracknell?

Lane.  Yes, sir.  [Hands them on a salver.]

Algernon.  [Inspects them, takes two, and sits down on the sofa.]  Oh! . . .
by the way, Lane, I see from your book that on Thursday night, when
Lord Shoreman and Mr. Worthing were dining with me, eight bottles of
champagne are entered as having been consumed.

Lane.  Yes, sir; eight bottles and a pint.

Algernon.  Why is it that at a bachelor's establishment the servants
invariably drink the champagne?  I ask merely for information.

Lane.  I attribute it to the superior quality of the wine, sir.  I have
often observed that in married households the champagne is rarely of a
first-rate brand.

Algernon.  Good heavens!  Is marriage so demoralising as that?

Lane.  I believe it _is_ a very pleasant state, sir.  I have had very
little experience of it myself up to the present.  I have only been
married once.  That was in consequence of a misunderstanding between
myself and a young person.

Algernon.  [Languidly_._]  I don't know that I am much interested in your
family life, Lane.

Lane.  No, sir; it is not a very interesting subject.  I never think of
it myself.

Algernon.  Very natural, I am sure.  That will do, Lane, thank you.

Lane.  Thank you, sir.  [Lane goes out.]

Algernon.  Lane's views on marriage seem somewhat lax.  Really, if the
lower orders don't set us a good example, what on earth is the use of
them?  They seem, as a class, to have absolutely no sense of moral
responsibility.

[Enter Lane.]

Lane.  Mr. Ernest Worthing.

[Enter Jack.]

[Lane goes out_._]

Algernon.  How are you, my dear Ernest?  What brings you up to town?

Jack.  Oh, pleasure, pleasure!  What else should bring one anywhere?
Eating as usual, I see, Algy!

Algernon.  [Stiffly_._]  I believe it is customary in good society to
take some slight refreshment at five o'clock.  Where have you been since
last Thursday?

Jack.  [Sitting down on the sofa.]  In the country.

Algernon.  What on earth do you do there?

Jack.  [Pulling off his gloves_._]  When one is in town one amuses
oneself.  When one is in the country one amuses other people.  It is
excessively boring.

Algernon.  And who are the people you amuse?

Jack.  [Airily_._]  Oh, neighbours, neighbours.

Algernon.  Got nice neighbours in your part of Shropshire?

Jack.  Perfectly horrid!  Never speak to one of them.

Algernon.  How immensely you must amuse them!  [Goes over and takes
sandwich.]  By the way, Shropshire is your county, is it not?

Jack.  Eh?  Shropshire?  Yes, of course.  Hallo!  Why all these cups?  Why
cucumber sandwiches?  Why such reckless extravagance in one so young?  Who
is coming to tea?

Algernon.  Oh! merely Aunt Augusta and Gwendolen.

Jack.  How perfectly delightful!

Algernon.  Yes, that is all very well; but I am afraid Aunt Augusta won't
quite approve of your being here.

Jack.  May I ask why?

Algernon.  My dear fellow, the way you flirt with Gwendolen is perfectly
disgraceful.  It is almost as bad as the way Gwendolen flirts with you.

Jack.  I am in love with Gwendolen.  I have come up to town expressly to
propose to her.

Algernon.  I thought you had come up for pleasure? . . . I call that
business.

Jack.  How utterly unromantic you are!

Algernon.  I really don't see anything romantic in proposing.  It is very
romantic to be in love.  But there is nothing romantic about a definite
proposal.  Why, one may be accepted.  One usually is, I believe.  Then
the excitement is all over.  The very essence of romance is uncertainty.
If ever I get married, I'll certainly try to forget the fact.

Jack.  I have no doubt about that, dear Algy.  The Divorce Court was
specially invented for people whose memories are so curiously
constituted.

Algernon.  Oh! there is no use speculating on that subject.  Divorces are
made in Heaven--[Jack puts out his hand to take a sandwich.  Algernon at
once interferes.]  Please don't touch the cucumber sandwiches.  They are
ordered specially for Aunt Augusta.  [Takes one and eats it.]

Jack.  Well, you have been eating them all the time.

Algernon.  That is quite a different matter.  She is my aunt.  [Takes
plate from below.]  Have some bread and butter.  The bread and butter is
for Gwendolen.  Gwendolen is devoted to bread and butter.

Jack.  [Advancing to table and helping himself.]  And very good bread and
butter it is too.

Algernon.  Well, my dear fellow, you need not eat as if you were going to
eat it all.  You behave as if you were married to her already.  You are
not married to her already, and I don't think you ever will be.

Jack.  Why on earth do you say that?

Algernon.  Well, in the first place girls never marry the men they flirt
with.  Girls don't think it right.

Jack.  Oh, that is nonsense!

Algernon.  It isn't.  It is a great truth.  It accounts for the
extraordinary number of bachelors that one sees all over the place.  In
the second place, I don't give my consent.

Jack.  Your consent!

Algernon.  My dear fellow, Gwendolen is my first cousin.  And before I
allow you to marry her, you will have to clear up the whole question of
Cecily.  [Rings bell.]

Jack.  Cecily!  What on earth do you mean?  What do you mean, Algy, by
Cecily!  I don't know any one of the name of Cecily.

[Enter Lane.]

Algernon.  Bring me that cigarette case Mr. Worthing left in the smoking-
room the last time he dined here.

Lane.  Yes, sir.  [Lane goes out.]

Jack.  Do you mean to say you have had my cigarette case all this time?  I
wish to goodness you had let me know.  I have been writing frantic
letters to Scotland Yard about it.  I was very nearly offering a large
reward.

Algernon.  Well, I wish you would offer one.  I happen to be more than
usually hard up.

Jack.  There is no good offering a large reward now that the thing is
found.

[Enter Lane with the cigarette case on a salver.  Algernon takes it at
once.  Lane goes out.]

Algernon.  I think that is rather mean of you, Ernest, I must say.  [Opens
case and examines it.]  However, it makes no matter, for, now that I look
at the inscription inside, I find that the thing isn't yours after all.

Jack.  Of course it's mine.  [Moving to him.]  You have seen me with it a
hundred times, and you have no right whatsoever to read what is written
inside.  It is a very ungentlemanly thing to read a private cigarette
case.

Algernon.  Oh! it is absurd to have a hard and fast rule about what one
should read and what one shouldn't.  More than half of modern culture
depends on what one shouldn't read.

Jack.  I am quite aware of the fact, and I don't propose to discuss
modern culture.  It isn't the sort of thing one should talk of in
private.  I simply want my cigarette case back.

Algernon.  Yes; but this isn't your cigarette case.  This cigarette case
is a present from some one of the name of Cecily, and you said you didn't
know any one of that name.

Jack.  Well, if you want to know, Cecily happens to be my aunt.

Algernon.  Your aunt!

Jack.  Yes.  Charming old lady she is, too.  Lives at Tunbridge Wells.
Just give it back to me, Algy.

Algernon.  [Retreating to back of sofa.]  But why does she call herself
little Cecily if she is your aunt and lives at Tunbridge Wells?
[Reading.]  'From little Cecily with her fondest love.'

Jack.  [Moving to sofa and kneeling upon it.]  My dear fellow, what on
earth is there in that?  Some aunts are tall, some aunts are not tall.
That is a matter that surely an aunt may be allowed to decide for
herself.  You seem to think that every aunt should be exactly like your
aunt!  That is absurd!  For Heaven's sake give me back my cigarette case.
[Follows Algernon round the room.]

Algernon.  Yes.  But why does your aunt call you her uncle?  'From little
Cecily, with her fondest love to her dear Uncle Jack.'  There is no
objection, I admit, to an aunt being a small aunt, but why an aunt, no
matter what her size may be, should call her own nephew her uncle, I
can't quite make out.  Besides, your name isn't Jack at all; it is
Ernest.

Jack.  It isn't Ernest; it's Jack.

Algernon.  You have always told me it was Ernest.  I have introduced you
to every one as Ernest.  You answer to the name of Ernest.  You look as
if your name was Ernest.  You are the most earnest-looking person I ever
saw in my life.  It is perfectly absurd your saying that your name isn't
Ernest.  It's on your cards.  Here is one of them.  [Taking it from
case.]  'Mr. Ernest Worthing, B. 4, The Albany.'  I'll keep this as a
proof that your name is Ernest if ever you attempt to deny it to me, or
to Gwendolen, or to any one else.  [Puts the card in his pocket.]

Jack.  Well, my name is Ernest in town and Jack in the country, and the
cigarette case was given to me in the country.

Algernon.  Yes, but that does not account for the fact that your small
Aunt Cecily, who lives at Tunbridge Wells, calls you her dear uncle.
Come, old boy, you had much better have the thing out at once.

Jack.  My dear Algy, you talk exactly as if you were a dentist.  It is
very vulgar to talk like a dentist when one isn't a dentist.  It produces
a false impression.

Algernon.  Well, that is exactly what dentists always do.  Now, go on!
Tell me the whole thing.  I may mention that I have always suspected you
of being a confirmed and secret Bunburyist; and I am quite sure of it
now.

Jack.  Bunburyist? What on earth do you mean by a Bunburyist?

Algernon.  I'll reveal to you the meaning of that incomparable expression
as soon as you are kind enough to inform me why you are Ernest in town
and Jack in the country.

Jack.  Well, produce my cigarette case first.

Algernon.  Here it is.  [Hands cigarette case.]  Now produce your
explanation, and pray make it improbable.  [Sits on sofa.]

Jack.  My dear fellow, there is nothing improbable about my explanation
at all.  In fact it's perfectly ordinary.  Old Mr. Thomas Cardew, who
adopted me when I was a little boy, made me in his will guardian to his
grand-daughter, Miss Cecily Cardew.  Cecily, who addresses me as her
uncle from motives of respect that you could not possibly appreciate,
lives at my place in the country under the charge of her admirable
governess, Miss Prism.

Algernon.  Where is that place in the country, by the way?

Jack.  That is nothing to you, dear boy.  You are not going to be invited
. . . I may tell you candidly that the place is not in Shropshire.

Algernon.  I suspected that, my dear fellow!  I have Bunburyed all over
Shropshire on two separate occasions.  Now, go on.  Why are you Ernest in
town and Jack in the country?

Jack.  My dear Algy, I don't know whether you will be able to understand
my real motives.  You are hardly serious enough.  When one is placed in
the position of guardian, one has to adopt a very high moral tone on all
subjects.  It's one's duty to do so.  And as a high moral tone can hardly
be said to conduce very much to either one's health or one's happiness,
in order to get up to town I have always pretended to have a younger
brother of the name of Ernest, who lives in the Albany, and gets into the
most dreadful scrapes.  That, my dear Algy, is the whole truth pure and
simple.

Algernon.  The truth is rarely pure and never simple.  Modern life would
be very tedious if it were either, and modern literature a complete
impossibility!

Jack.  That wouldn't be at all a bad thing.

Algernon.  Literary criticism is not your forte, my dear fellow.  Don't
try it.  You should leave that to people who haven't been at a
University.  They do it so well in the daily papers.  What you really are
is a Bunburyist.  I was quite right in saying you were a Bunburyist.  You
are one of the most advanced Bunburyists I know.

Jack.  What on earth do you mean?

Algernon.  You have invented a very useful younger brother called Ernest,
in order that you may be able to come up to town as often as you like.  I
have invented an invaluable permanent invalid called Bunbury, in order
that I may be able to go down into the country whenever I choose.  Bunbury
is perfectly invaluable.  If it wasn't for Bunbury's extraordinary bad
health, for instance, I wouldn't be able to dine with you at Willis's to-
night, for I have been really engaged to Aunt Augusta for more than a
week.

Jack.  I haven't asked you to dine with me anywhere to-night.

Algernon.  I know.  You are absurdly careless about sending out
invitations.  It is very foolish of you.  Nothing annoys people so much
as not receiving invitations.

Jack.  You had much better dine with your Aunt Augusta.

Algernon.  I haven't the smallest intention of doing anything of the
kind.  To begin with, I dined there on Monday, and once a week is quite
enough to dine with one's own relations.  In the second place, whenever I
do dine there I am always treated as a member of the family, and sent
down with either no woman at all, or two.  In the third place, I know
perfectly well whom she will place me next to, to-night.  She will place
me next Mary Farquhar, who always flirts with her own husband across the
dinner-table.  That is not very pleasant.  Indeed, it is not even decent
. . . and that sort of thing is enormously on the increase.  The amount
of women in London who flirt with their own husbands is perfectly
scandalous.  It looks so bad.  It is simply washing one's clean linen in
public.  Besides, now that I know you to be a confirmed Bunburyist I
naturally want to talk to you about Bunburying.  I want to tell you the
rules.

Jack.  I'm not a Bunburyist at all.  If Gwendolen accepts me, I am going
to kill my brother, indeed I think I'll kill him in any case.  Cecily is
a little too much interested in him.  It is rather a bore.  So I am going
to get rid of Ernest.  And I strongly advise you to do the same with Mr.
. . . with your invalid friend who has the absurd name.

Algernon.  Nothing will induce me to part with Bunbury, and if you ever
get married, which seems to me extremely problematic, you will be very
glad to know Bunbury.  A man who marries without knowing Bunbury has a
very tedious time of it.

Jack.  That is nonsense.  If I marry a charming girl like Gwendolen, and
she is the only girl I ever saw in my life that I would marry, I
certainly won't want to know Bunbury.

Algernon.  Then your wife will.  You don't seem to realise, that in
married life three is company and two is none.

Jack.  [Sententiously.]  That, my dear young friend, is the theory that
the corrupt French Drama has been propounding for the last fifty years.

Algernon.  Yes; and that the happy English home has proved in half the
time.

Jack.  For heaven's sake, don't try to be cynical.  It's perfectly easy
to be cynical.

Algernon.  My dear fellow, it isn't easy to be anything nowadays.  There's
such a lot of beastly competition about.  [The sound of an electric bell
is heard.]  Ah! that must be Aunt Augusta.  Only relatives, or creditors,
ever ring in that Wagnerian manner.  Now, if I get her out of the way for
ten minutes, so that you can have an opportunity for proposing to
Gwendolen, may I dine with you to-night at Willis's?

Jack.  I suppose so, if you want to.

Algernon.  Yes, but you must be serious about it.  I hate people who are
not serious about meals.  It is so shallow of them.

[Enter Lane.]

Lane.  Lady Bracknell and Miss Fairfax.

[Algernon goes forward to meet them.  Enter Lady Bracknell and
Gwendolen.]

Lady Bracknell.  Good afternoon, dear Algernon, I hope you are behaving
very well.

Algernon.  I'm feeling very well, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  That's not quite the same thing.  In fact the two things
rarely go together.  [Sees Jack and bows to him with icy coldness.]

Algernon.  [To Gwendolen.]  Dear me, you are smart!

Gwendolen.  I am always smart!  Am I not, Mr. Worthing?

Jack.  You're quite perfect, Miss Fairfax.

Gwendolen.  Oh! I hope I am not that.  It would leave no room for
developments, and I intend to develop in many directions.  [Gwendolen and
Jack sit down together in the corner.]

Lady Bracknell.  I'm sorry if we are a little late, Algernon, but I was
obliged to call on dear Lady Harbury.  I hadn't been there since her poor
husband's death.  I never saw a woman so altered; she looks quite twenty
years younger.  And now I'll have a cup of tea, and one of those nice
cucumber sandwiches you promised me.

Algernon.  Certainly, Aunt Augusta.  [Goes over to tea-table.]

Lady Bracknell.  Won't you come and sit here, Gwendolen?

Gwendolen.  Thanks, mamma, I'm quite comfortable where I am.

Algernon.  [Picking up empty plate in horror.]  Good heavens!  Lane!  Why
are there no cucumber sandwiches?  I ordered them specially.

Lane.  [Gravely.]  There were no cucumbers in the market this morning,
sir.  I went down twice.

Algernon.  No cucumbers!

Lane.  No, sir.  Not even for ready money.

Algernon.  That will do, Lane, thank you.

Lane.  Thank you, sir.  [Goes out.]

Algernon.  I am greatly distressed, Aunt Augusta, about there being no
cucumbers, not even for ready money.

Lady Bracknell.  It really makes no matter, Algernon.  I had some
crumpets with Lady Harbury, who seems to me to be living entirely for
pleasure now.

Algernon.  I hear her hair has turned quite gold from grief.

Lady Bracknell.  It certainly has changed its colour.  From what cause I,
of course, cannot say.  [Algernon crosses and hands tea.]  Thank you.
I've quite a treat for you to-night, Algernon.  I am going to send you
down with Mary Farquhar.  She is such a nice woman, and so attentive to
her husband.  It's delightful to watch them.

Algernon.  I am afraid, Aunt Augusta, I shall have to give up the
pleasure of dining with you to-night after all.

Lady Bracknell.  [Frowning.]  I hope not, Algernon.  It would put my
table completely out.  Your uncle would have to dine upstairs.
Fortunately he is accustomed to that.

Algernon.  It is a great bore, and, I need hardly say, a terrible
disappointment to me, but the fact is I have just had a telegram to say
that my poor friend Bunbury is very ill again.  [Exchanges glances with
Jack.]  They seem to think I should be with him.

Lady Bracknell.  It is very strange.  This Mr. Bunbury seems to suffer
from curiously bad health.

Algernon.  Yes; poor Bunbury is a dreadful invalid.

Lady Bracknell.  Well, I must say, Algernon, that I think it is high time
that Mr. Bunbury made up his mind whether he was going to live or to die.
This shilly-shallying with the question is absurd.  Nor do I in any way
approve of the modern sympathy with invalids.  I consider it morbid.
Illness of any kind is hardly a thing to be encouraged in others.  Health
is the primary duty of life.  I am always telling that to your poor
uncle, but he never seems to take much notice . . . as far as any
improvement in his ailment goes.  I should be much obliged if you would
ask Mr. Bunbury, from me, to be kind enough not to have a relapse on
Saturday, for I rely on you to arrange my music for me.  It is my last
reception, and one wants something that will encourage conversation,
particularly at the end of the season when every one has practically said
whatever they had to say, which, in most cases, was probably not much.

Algernon.  I'll speak to Bunbury, Aunt Augusta, if he is still conscious,
and I think I can promise you he'll be all right by Saturday.  Of course
the music is a great difficulty.  You see, if one plays good music,
people don't listen, and if one plays bad music people don't talk.  But
I'll run over the programme I've drawn out, if you will kindly come into
the next room for a moment.

Lady Bracknell.  Thank you, Algernon.  It is very thoughtful of you.
[Rising, and following Algernon.]  I'm sure the programme will be
delightful, after a few expurgations.  French songs I cannot possibly
allow.  People always seem to think that they are improper, and either
look shocked, which is vulgar, or laugh, which is worse.  But German
sounds a thoroughly respectable language, and indeed, I believe is so.
Gwendolen, you will accompany me.

Gwendolen.  Certainly, mamma.

[Lady Bracknell and Algernon go into the music-room, Gwendolen remains
behind.]

Jack.  Charming day it has been, Miss Fairfax.

Gwendolen.  Pray don't talk to me about the weather, Mr. Worthing.
Whenever people talk to me about the weather, I always feel quite certain
that they mean something else.  And that makes me so nervous.

Jack.  I do mean something else.

Gwendolen.  I thought so.  In fact, I am never wrong.

Jack.  And I would like to be allowed to take advantage of Lady
Bracknell's temporary absence . . .

Gwendolen.  I would certainly advise you to do so.  Mamma has a way of
coming back suddenly into a room that I have often had to speak to her
about.

Jack.  [Nervously.]  Miss Fairfax, ever since I met you I have admired
you more than any girl . . . I have ever met since . . . I met you.

Gwendolen.  Yes, I am quite well aware of the fact.  And I often wish
that in public, at any rate, you had been more demonstrative.  For me you
have always had an irresistible fascination.  Even before I met you I was
far from indifferent to you.  [Jack looks at her in amazement.]  We live,
as I hope you know, Mr. Worthing, in an age of ideals.  The fact is
constantly mentioned in the more expensive monthly magazines, and has
reached the provincial pulpits, I am told; and my ideal has always been
to love some one of the name of Ernest.  There is something in that name
that inspires absolute confidence.  The moment Algernon first mentioned
to me that he had a friend called Ernest, I knew I was destined to love
you.

Jack.  You really love me, Gwendolen?

Gwendolen.  Passionately!

Jack.  Darling!  You don't know how happy you've made me.

Gwendolen.  My own Ernest!

Jack.  But you don't really mean to say that you couldn't love me if my
name wasn't Ernest?

Gwendolen.  But your name is Ernest.

Jack.  Yes, I know it is.  But supposing it was something else?  Do you
mean to say you couldn't love me then?

Gwendolen.  [Glibly.]  Ah! that is clearly a metaphysical speculation,
and like most metaphysical speculations has very little reference at all
to the actual facts of real life, as we know them.

Jack.  Personally, darling, to speak quite candidly, I don't much care
about the name of Ernest . . . I don't think the name suits me at all.

Gwendolen.  It suits you perfectly.  It is a divine name.  It has a music
of its own.  It produces vibrations.

Jack.  Well, really, Gwendolen, I must say that I think there are lots of
other much nicer names.  I think Jack, for instance, a charming name.

Gwendolen.  Jack? . . . No, there is very little music in the name Jack,
if any at all, indeed.  It does not thrill.  It produces absolutely no
vibrations . . . I have known several Jacks, and they all, without
exception, were more than usually plain.  Besides, Jack is a notorious
domesticity for John!  And I pity any woman who is married to a man
called John.  She would probably never be allowed to know the entrancing
pleasure of a single moment's solitude.  The only really safe name is
Ernest.

Jack.  Gwendolen, I must get christened at once--I mean we must get
married at once.  There is no time to be lost.

Gwendolen.  Married, Mr. Worthing?

Jack.  [Astounded.]  Well . . . surely.  You know that I love you, and
you led me to believe, Miss Fairfax, that you were not absolutely
indifferent to me.

Gwendolen.  I adore you.  But you haven't proposed to me yet.  Nothing
has been said at all about marriage.  The subject has not even been
touched on.

Jack.  Well . . . may I propose to you now?

Gwendolen.  I think it would be an admirable opportunity.  And to spare
you any possible disappointment, Mr. Worthing, I think it only fair to
tell you quite frankly before-hand that I am fully determined to accept
you.

Jack.  Gwendolen!

Gwendolen.  Yes, Mr. Worthing, what have you got to say to me?

Jack.  You know what I have got to say to you.

Gwendolen.  Yes, but you don't say it.

Jack.  Gwendolen, will you marry me?  [Goes on his knees.]

Gwendolen.  Of course I will, darling.  How long you have been about it!
I am afraid you have had very little experience in how to propose.

Jack.  My own one, I have never loved any one in the world but you.

Gwendolen.  Yes, but men often propose for practice.  I know my brother
Gerald does.  All my girl-friends tell me so.  What wonderfully blue eyes
you have, Ernest!  They are quite, quite, blue.  I hope you will always
look at me just like that, especially when there are other people
present.  [Enter Lady Bracknell.]

Lady Bracknell.  Mr. Worthing!  Rise, sir, from this semi-recumbent
posture.  It is most indecorous.

Gwendolen.  Mamma!  [He tries to rise; she restrains him.]  I must beg
you to retire.  This is no place for you.  Besides, Mr. Worthing has not
quite finished yet.

Lady Bracknell.  Finished what, may I ask?

Gwendolen.  I am engaged to Mr. Worthing, mamma.  [They rise together.]

Lady Bracknell.  Pardon me, you are not engaged to any one.  When you do
become engaged to some one, I, or your father, should his health permit
him, will inform you of the fact.  An engagement should come on a young
girl as a surprise, pleasant or unpleasant, as the case may be.  It is
hardly a matter that she could be allowed to arrange for herself . . .
And now I have a few questions to put to you, Mr. Worthing.  While I am
making these inquiries, you, Gwendolen, will wait for me below in the
carriage.

Gwendolen.  [Reproachfully.]  Mamma!

Lady Bracknell.  In the carriage, Gwendolen!  [Gwendolen goes to the
door.  She and Jack blow kisses to each other behind Lady Bracknell's
back.  Lady Bracknell looks vaguely about as if she could not understand
what the noise was.  Finally turns round.]  Gwendolen, the carriage!

Gwendolen.  Yes, mamma.  [Goes out, looking back at Jack.]

Lady Bracknell.  [Sitting down.]  You can take a seat, Mr. Worthing.

[Looks in her pocket for note-book and pencil.]

Jack.  Thank you, Lady Bracknell, I prefer standing.

Lady Bracknell.  [Pencil and note-book in hand.]  I feel bound to tell
you that you are not down on my list of eligible young men, although I
have the same list as the dear Duchess of Bolton has.  We work together,
in fact.  However, I am quite ready to enter your name, should your
answers be what a really affectionate mother requires.  Do you smoke?

Jack.  Well, yes, I must admit I smoke.

Lady Bracknell.  I am glad to hear it.  A man should always have an
occupation of some kind.  There are far too many idle men in London as it
is.  How old are you?

Jack.  Twenty-nine.

Lady Bracknell.  A very good age to be married at.  I have always been of
opinion that a man who desires to get married should know either
everything or nothing.  Which do you know?

Jack.  [After some hesitation.]  I know nothing, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  I am pleased to hear it.  I do not approve of anything
that tampers with natural ignorance.  Ignorance is like a delicate exotic
fruit; touch it and the bloom is gone.  The whole theory of modern
education is radically unsound.  Fortunately in England, at any rate,
education produces no effect whatsoever.  If it did, it would prove a
serious danger to the upper classes, and probably lead to acts of
violence in Grosvenor Square.  What is your income?

Jack.  Between seven and eight thousand a year.

Lady Bracknell.  [Makes a note in her book.]  In land, or in investments?

Jack.  In investments, chiefly.

Lady Bracknell.  That is satisfactory.  What between the duties expected
of one during one's lifetime, and the duties exacted from one after one's
death, land has ceased to be either a profit or a pleasure.  It gives one
position, and prevents one from keeping it up.  That's all that can be
said about land.

Jack.  I have a country house with some land, of course, attached to it,
about fifteen hundred acres, I believe; but I don't depend on that for my
real income.  In fact, as far as I can make out, the poachers are the
only people who make anything out of it.

Lady Bracknell.  A country house!  How many bedrooms?  Well, that point
can be cleared up afterwards.  You have a town house, I hope?  A girl
with a simple, unspoiled nature, like Gwendolen, could hardly be expected
to reside in the country.

Jack.  Well, I own a house in Belgrave Square, but it is let by the year
to Lady Bloxham.  Of course, I can get it back whenever I like, at six
months' notice.

Lady Bracknell.  Lady Bloxham?  I don't know her.

Jack.  Oh, she goes about very little.  She is a lady considerably
advanced in years.

Lady Bracknell.  Ah, nowadays that is no guarantee of respectability of
character.  What number in Belgrave Square?

Jack.  149.

Lady Bracknell.  [Shaking her head.]  The unfashionable side.  I thought
there was something.  However, that could easily be altered.

Jack.  Do you mean the fashion, or the side?

Lady Bracknell.  [Sternly.]  Both, if necessary, I presume.  What are
your politics?

Jack.  Well, I am afraid I really have none.  I am a Liberal Unionist.

Lady Bracknell.  Oh, they count as Tories.  They dine with us.  Or come
in the evening, at any rate.  Now to minor matters.  Are your parents
living?

Jack.  I have lost both my parents.

Lady Bracknell.  To lose one parent, Mr. Worthing, may be regarded as a
misfortune; to lose both looks like carelessness.  Who was your father?
He was evidently a man of some wealth.  Was he born in what the Radical
papers call the purple of commerce, or did he rise from the ranks of the
aristocracy?

Jack.  I am afraid I really don't know.  The fact is, Lady Bracknell, I
said I had lost my parents.  It would be nearer the truth to say that my
parents seem to have lost me . . . I don't actually know who I am by
birth.  I was . . . well, I was found.

Lady Bracknell.  Found!

Jack.  The late Mr. Thomas Cardew, an old gentleman of a very charitable
and kindly disposition, found me, and gave me the name of Worthing,
because he happened to have a first-class ticket for Worthing in his
pocket at the time.  Worthing is a place in Sussex.  It is a seaside
resort.

Lady Bracknell.  Where did the charitable gentleman who had a first-class
ticket for this seaside resort find you?

Jack.  [Gravely.]  In a hand-bag.

Lady Bracknell.  A hand-bag?

Jack.  [Very seriously.]  Yes, Lady Bracknell.  I was in a hand-bag--a
somewhat large, black leather hand-bag, with handles to it--an ordinary
hand-bag in fact.

Lady Bracknell.  In what locality did this Mr. James, or Thomas, Cardew
come across this ordinary hand-bag?

Jack.  In the cloak-room at Victoria Station.  It was given to him in
mistake for his own.

Lady Bracknell.  The cloak-room at Victoria Station?

Jack.  Yes.  The Brighton line.

Lady Bracknell.  The line is immaterial.  Mr. Worthing, I confess I feel
somewhat bewildered by what you have just told me.  To be born, or at any
rate bred, in a hand-bag, whether it had handles or not, seems to me to
display a contempt for the ordinary decencies of family life that reminds
one of the worst excesses of the French Revolution.  And I presume you
know what that unfortunate movement led to?  As for the particular
locality in which the hand-bag was found, a cloak-room at a railway
station might serve to conceal a social indiscretion--has probably,
indeed, been used for that purpose before now--but it could hardly be
regarded as an assured basis for a recognised position in good society.

Jack.  May I ask you then what you would advise me to do?  I need hardly
say I would do anything in the world to ensure Gwendolen's happiness.

Lady Bracknell.  I would strongly advise you, Mr. Worthing, to try and
acquire some relations as soon as possible, and to make a definite effort
to produce at any rate one parent, of either sex, before the season is
quite over.

Jack.  Well, I don't see how I could possibly manage to do that.  I can
produce the hand-bag at any moment.  It is in my dressing-room at home.  I
really think that should satisfy you, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  Me, sir!  What has it to do with me?  You can hardly
imagine that I and Lord Bracknell would dream of allowing our only
daughter--a girl brought up with the utmost care--to marry into a cloak-
room, and form an alliance with a parcel?  Good morning, Mr. Worthing!

[Lady Bracknell sweeps out in majestic indignation.]

Jack.  Good morning!  [Algernon, from the other room, strikes up the
Wedding March.  Jack looks perfectly furious, and goes to the door.]  For
goodness' sake don't play that ghastly tune, Algy.  How idiotic you are!

[The music stops and Algernon enters cheerily.]

Algernon.  Didn't it go off all right, old boy?  You don't mean to say
Gwendolen refused you?  I know it is a way she has.  She is always
refusing people.  I think it is most ill-natured of her.

Jack.  Oh, Gwendolen is as right as a trivet.  As far as she is
concerned, we are engaged.  Her mother is perfectly unbearable.  Never
met such a Gorgon . . . I don't really know what a Gorgon is like, but I
am quite sure that Lady Bracknell is one.  In any case, she is a monster,
without being a myth, which is rather unfair . . . I beg your pardon,
Algy, I suppose I shouldn't talk about your own aunt in that way before
you.

Algernon.  My dear boy, I love hearing my relations abused.  It is the
only thing that makes me put up with them at all.  Relations are simply a
tedious pack of people, who haven't got the remotest knowledge of how to
live, nor the smallest instinct about when to die.

Jack.  Oh, that is nonsense!

Algernon.  It isn't!

Jack.  Well, I won't argue about the matter.  You always want to argue
about things.

Algernon.  That is exactly what things were originally made for.

Jack.  Upon my word, if I thought that, I'd shoot myself . . . [A pause.]
You don't think there is any chance of Gwendolen becoming like her mother
in about a hundred and fifty years, do you, Algy?

Algernon.  All women become like their mothers.  That is their tragedy.
No man does.  That's his.

Jack.  Is that clever?

Algernon.  It is perfectly phrased! and quite as true as any observation
in civilised life should be.

Jack.  I am sick to death of cleverness.  Everybody is clever nowadays.
You can't go anywhere without meeting clever people.  The thing has
become an absolute public nuisance.  I wish to goodness we had a few
fools left.

Algernon.  We have.

Jack.  I should extremely like to meet them.  What do they talk about?

Algernon.  The fools?  Oh! about the clever people, of course.

Jack.  What fools!

Algernon.  By the way, did you tell Gwendolen the truth about your being
Ernest in town, and Jack in the country?

Jack.  [In a very patronising manner.]  My dear fellow, the truth isn't
quite the sort of thing one tells to a nice, sweet, refined girl.  What
extraordinary ideas you have about the way to behave to a woman!

Algernon.  The only way to behave to a woman is to make love to her, if
she is pretty, and to some one else, if she is plain.

Jack.  Oh, that is nonsense.

Algernon.  What about your brother?  What about the profligate Ernest?

Jack.  Oh, before the end of the week I shall have got rid of him.  I'll
say he died in Paris of apoplexy.  Lots of people die of apoplexy, quite
suddenly, don't they?

Algernon.  Yes, but it's hereditary, my dear fellow.  It's a sort of
thing that runs in families.  You had much better say a severe chill.

Jack.  You are sure a severe chill isn't hereditary, or anything of that
kind?

Algernon.  Of course it isn't!

Jack.  Very well, then.  My poor brother Ernest to carried off suddenly,
in Paris, by a severe chill.  That gets rid of him.

Algernon.  But I thought you said that . . . Miss Cardew was a little too
much interested in your poor brother Ernest?  Won't she feel his loss a
good deal?

Jack.  Oh, that is all right.  Cecily is not a silly romantic girl, I am
glad to say.  She has got a capital appetite, goes long walks, and pays
no attention at all to her lessons.

Algernon.  I would rather like to see Cecily.

Jack.  I will take very good care you never do.  She is excessively
pretty, and she is only just eighteen.

Algernon.  Have you told Gwendolen yet that you have an excessively
pretty ward who is only just eighteen?

Jack.  Oh! one doesn't blurt these things out to people.  Cecily and
Gwendolen are perfectly certain to be extremely great friends.  I'll bet
you anything you like that half an hour after they have met, they will be
calling each other sister.

Algernon.  Women only do that when they have called each other a lot of
other things first.  Now, my dear boy, if we want to get a good table at
Willis's, we really must go and dress.  Do you know it is nearly seven?

Jack.  [Irritably.]  Oh!  It always is nearly seven.

Algernon.  Well, I'm hungry.

Jack.  I never knew you when you weren't . . .

Algernon.  What shall we do after dinner?  Go to a theatre?

Jack.  Oh no!  I loathe listening.

Algernon.  Well, let us go to the Club?

Jack.  Oh, no!  I hate talking.

Algernon.  Well, we might trot round to the Empire at ten?

Jack.  Oh, no!  I can't bear looking at things.  It is so silly.

Algernon.  Well, what shall we do?

Jack.  Nothing!

Algernon.  It is awfully hard work doing nothing.  However, I don't mind
hard work where there is no definite object of any kind.

[Enter Lane.]

Lane.  Miss Fairfax.

[Enter Gwendolen.  Lane goes out.]

Algernon.  Gwendolen, upon my word!

Gwendolen.  Algy, kindly turn your back.  I have something very
particular to say to Mr. Worthing.

Algernon.  Really, Gwendolen, I don't think I can allow this at all.

Gwendolen.  Algy, you always adopt a strictly immoral attitude towards
life.  You are not quite old enough to do that.  [Algernon retires to the
fireplace.]

Jack.  My own darling!

Gwendolen.  Ernest, we may never be married.  From the expression on
mamma's face I fear we never shall.  Few parents nowadays pay any regard
to what their children say to them.  The old-fashioned respect for the
young is fast dying out.  Whatever influence I ever had over mamma, I
lost at the age of three.  But although she may prevent us from becoming
man and wife, and I may marry some one else, and marry often, nothing
that she can possibly do can alter my eternal devotion to you.

Jack.  Dear Gwendolen!

Gwendolen.  The story of your romantic origin, as related to me by mamma,
with unpleasing comments, has naturally stirred the deeper fibres of my
nature.  Your Christian name has an irresistible fascination.  The
simplicity of your character makes you exquisitely incomprehensible to
me.  Your town address at the Albany I have.  What is your address in the
country?

Jack.  The Manor House, Woolton, Hertfordshire.

[Algernon, who has been carefully listening, smiles to himself, and
writes the address on his shirt-cuff.  Then picks up the Railway Guide.]

Gwendolen.  There is a good postal service, I suppose?  It may be
necessary to do something desperate.  That of course will require serious
consideration.  I will communicate with you daily.

Jack.  My own one!

Gwendolen.  How long do you remain in town?

Jack.  Till Monday.

Gwendolen.  Good!  Algy, you may turn round now.

Algernon.  Thanks, I've turned round already.

Gwendolen.  You may also ring the bell.

Jack.  You will let me see you to your carriage, my own darling?

Gwendolen.  Certainly.

Jack.  [To Lane, who now enters.]  I will see Miss Fairfax out.

Lane.  Yes, sir.  [Jack and Gwendolen go off.]

[Lane presents several letters on a salver to Algernon.  It is to be
surmised that they are bills, as Algernon, after looking at the
envelopes, tears them up.]

Algernon.  A glass of sherry, Lane.

Lane.  Yes, sir.

Algernon.  To-morrow, Lane, I'm going Bunburying.

Lane.  Yes, sir.

Algernon.  I shall probably not be back till Monday.  You can put up my
dress clothes, my smoking jacket, and all the Bunbury suits . . .

Lane.  Yes, sir.  [Handing sherry.]

Algernon.  I hope to-morrow will be a fine day, Lane.

Lane.  It never is, sir.

Algernon.  Lane, you're a perfect pessimist.

Lane.  I do my best to give satisfaction, sir.

[Enter Jack.  Lane goes off.]

Jack.  There's a sensible, intellectual girl! the only girl I ever cared
for in my life.  [Algernon is laughing immoderately.]  What on earth are
you so amused at?

Algernon.  Oh, I'm a little anxious about poor Bunbury, that is all.

Jack.  If you don't take care, your friend Bunbury will get you into a
serious scrape some day.

Algernon.  I love scrapes.  They are the only things that are never
serious.

Jack.  Oh, that's nonsense, Algy.  You never talk anything but nonsense.

Algernon.  Nobody ever does.

[Jack looks indignantly at him, and leaves the room.  Algernon lights a
cigarette, reads his shirt-cuff, and smiles.]

ACT DROP




SECOND ACT


SCENE


Garden at the Manor House.  A flight of grey stone steps leads up to the
house.  The garden, an old-fashioned one, full of roses.  Time of year,
July.  Basket chairs, and a table covered with books, are set under a
large yew-tree.

[Miss Prism discovered seated at the table.  Cecily is at the back
watering flowers.]

Miss Prism.  [Calling.]  Cecily, Cecily!  Surely such a utilitarian
occupation as the watering of flowers is rather Moulton's duty than
yours?  Especially at a moment when intellectual pleasures await you.
Your German grammar is on the table.  Pray open it at page fifteen.  We
will repeat yesterday's lesson.

Cecily.  [Coming over very slowly.]  But I don't like German.  It isn't
at all a becoming language.  I know perfectly well that I look quite
plain after my German lesson.

Miss Prism.  Child, you know how anxious your guardian is that you should
improve yourself in every way.  He laid particular stress on your German,
as he was leaving for town yesterday.  Indeed, he always lays stress on
your German when he is leaving for town.

Cecily.  Dear Uncle Jack is so very serious!  Sometimes he is so serious
that I think he cannot be quite well.

Miss Prism.  [Drawing herself up.]  Your guardian enjoys the best of
health, and his gravity of demeanour is especially to be commended in one
so comparatively young as he is.  I know no one who has a higher sense of
duty and responsibility.

Cecily.  I suppose that is why he often looks a little bored when we
three are together.

Miss Prism.  Cecily!  I am surprised at you.  Mr. Worthing has many
troubles in his life.  Idle merriment and triviality would be out of
place in his conversation.  You must remember his constant anxiety about
that unfortunate young man his brother.

Cecily.  I wish Uncle Jack would allow that unfortunate young man, his
brother, to come down here sometimes.  We might have a good influence
over him, Miss Prism.  I am sure you certainly would.  You know German,
and geology, and things of that kind influence a man very much.  [Cecily
begins to write in her diary.]

Miss Prism.  [Shaking her head.]  I do not think that even I could
produce any effect on a character that according to his own brother's
admission is irretrievably weak and vacillating.  Indeed I am not sure
that I would desire to reclaim him.  I am not in favour of this modern
mania for turning bad people into good people at a moment's notice.  As a
man sows so let him reap.  You must put away your diary, Cecily.  I
really don't see why you should keep a diary at all.

Cecily.  I keep a diary in order to enter the wonderful secrets of my
life.  If I didn't write them down, I should probably forget all about
them.

Miss Prism.  Memory, my dear Cecily, is the diary that we all carry about
with us.

Cecily.  Yes, but it usually chronicles the things that have never
happened, and couldn't possibly have happened.  I believe that Memory is
responsible for nearly all the three-volume novels that Mudie sends us.

Miss Prism.  Do not speak slightingly of the three-volume novel, Cecily.
I wrote one myself in earlier days.

Cecily.  Did you really, Miss Prism?  How wonderfully clever you are!  I
hope it did not end happily?  I don't like novels that end happily.  They
depress me so much.

Miss Prism.  The good ended happily, and the bad unhappily.  That is what
Fiction means.

Cecily.  I suppose so.  But it seems very unfair.  And was your novel
ever published?

Miss Prism.  Alas! no.  The manuscript unfortunately was abandoned.
[Cecily starts.]  I use the word in the sense of lost or mislaid.  To
your work, child, these speculations are profitless.

Cecily.  [Smiling.]  But I see dear Dr. Chasuble coming up through the
garden.

Miss Prism.  [Rising and advancing.]  Dr. Chasuble!  This is indeed a
pleasure.

[Enter Canon Chasuble.]

Chasuble.  And how are we this morning?  Miss Prism, you are, I trust,
well?

Cecily.  Miss Prism has just been complaining of a slight headache.  I
think it would do her so much good to have a short stroll with you in the
Park, Dr. Chasuble.

Miss Prism.  Cecily, I have not mentioned anything about a headache.

Cecily.  No, dear Miss Prism, I know that, but I felt instinctively that
you had a headache.  Indeed I was thinking about that, and not about my
German lesson, when the Rector came in.

Chasuble.  I hope, Cecily, you are not inattentive.

Cecily.  Oh, I am afraid I am.

Chasuble.  That is strange.  Were I fortunate enough to be Miss Prism's
pupil, I would hang upon her lips.  [Miss Prism glares.]  I spoke
metaphorically.--My metaphor was drawn from bees.  Ahem!  Mr. Worthing, I
suppose, has not returned from town yet?

Miss Prism.  We do not expect him till Monday afternoon.

Chasuble.  Ah yes, he usually likes to spend his Sunday in London.  He is
not one of those whose sole aim is enjoyment, as, by all accounts, that
unfortunate young man his brother seems to be.  But I must not disturb
Egeria and her pupil any longer.

Miss Prism.  Egeria?  My name is Laetitia, Doctor.

Chasuble.  [Bowing.]  A classical allusion merely, drawn from the Pagan
authors.  I shall see you both no doubt at Evensong?

Miss Prism.  I think, dear Doctor, I will have a stroll with you.  I find
I have a headache after all, and a walk might do it good.

Chasuble.  With pleasure, Miss Prism, with pleasure.  We might go as far
as the schools and back.

Miss Prism.  That would be delightful.  Cecily, you will read your
Political Economy in my absence.  The chapter on the Fall of the Rupee
you may omit.  It is somewhat too sensational.  Even these metallic
problems have their melodramatic side.

[Goes down the garden with Dr. Chasuble.]

Cecily.  [Picks up books and throws them back on table.]  Horrid
Political Economy!  Horrid Geography!  Horrid, horrid German!

[Enter Merriman with a card on a salver.]

Merriman.  Mr. Ernest Worthing has just driven over from the station.  He
has brought his luggage with him.

Cecily.  [Takes the card and reads it.]  'Mr. Ernest Worthing, B. 4, The
Albany, W.'  Uncle Jack's brother!  Did you tell him Mr. Worthing was in
town?

Merriman.  Yes, Miss.  He seemed very much disappointed.  I mentioned
that you and Miss Prism were in the garden.  He said he was anxious to
speak to you privately for a moment.

Cecily.  Ask Mr. Ernest Worthing to come here.  I suppose you had better
talk to the housekeeper about a room for him.

Merriman.  Yes, Miss.

[Merriman goes off.]

Cecily.  I have never met any really wicked person before.  I feel rather
frightened.  I am so afraid he will look just like every one else.

[Enter Algernon, very gay and debonnair.]  He does!

Algernon.  [Raising his hat.]  You are my little cousin Cecily, I'm sure.

Cecily.  You are under some strange mistake.  I am not little.  In fact,
I believe I am more than usually tall for my age.  [Algernon is rather
taken aback.]  But I am your cousin Cecily.  You, I see from your card,
are Uncle Jack's brother, my cousin Ernest, my wicked cousin Ernest.

Algernon.  Oh! I am not really wicked at all, cousin Cecily.  You mustn't
think that I am wicked.

Cecily.  If you are not, then you have certainly been deceiving us all in
a very inexcusable manner.  I hope you have not been leading a double
life, pretending to be wicked and being really good all the time.  That
would be hypocrisy.

Algernon.  [Looks at her in amazement.]  Oh!  Of course I have been
rather reckless.

Cecily.  I am glad to hear it.

Algernon.  In fact, now you mention the subject, I have been very bad in
my own small way.

Cecily.  I don't think you should be so proud of that, though I am sure
it must have been very pleasant.

Algernon.  It is much pleasanter being here with you.

Cecily.  I can't understand how you are here at all.  Uncle Jack won't be
back till Monday afternoon.

Algernon.  That is a great disappointment.  I am obliged to go up by the
first train on Monday morning.  I have a business appointment that I am
anxious . . . to miss?

Cecily.  Couldn't you miss it anywhere but in London?

Algernon.  No: the appointment is in London.

Cecily.  Well, I know, of course, how important it is not to keep a
business engagement, if one wants to retain any sense of the beauty of
life, but still I think you had better wait till Uncle Jack arrives.  I
know he wants to speak to you about your emigrating.

Algernon.  About my what?

Cecily.  Your emigrating.  He has gone up to buy your outfit.

Algernon.  I certainly wouldn't let Jack buy my outfit.  He has no taste
in neckties at all.

Cecily.  I don't think you will require neckties.  Uncle Jack is sending
you to Australia.

Algernon.  Australia!  I'd sooner die.

Cecily.  Well, he said at dinner on Wednesday night, that you would have
to choose between this world, the next world, and Australia.

Algernon.  Oh, well!  The accounts I have received of Australia and the
next world, are not particularly encouraging.  This world is good enough
for me, cousin Cecily.

Cecily.  Yes, but are you good enough for it?

Algernon.  I'm afraid I'm not that.  That is why I want you to reform me.
You might make that your mission, if you don't mind, cousin Cecily.

Cecily.  I'm afraid I've no time, this afternoon.

Algernon.  Well, would you mind my reforming myself this afternoon?

Cecily.  It is rather Quixotic of you.  But I think you should try.

Algernon.  I will.  I feel better already.

Cecily.  You are looking a little worse.

Algernon.  That is because I am hungry.

Cecily.  How thoughtless of me.  I should have remembered that when one
is going to lead an entirely new life, one requires regular and wholesome
meals.  Won't you come in?

Algernon.  Thank you.  Might I have a buttonhole first?  I never have any
appetite unless I have a buttonhole first.

Cecily.  A Marechal Niel?  [Picks up scissors.]

Algernon.  No, I'd sooner have a pink rose.

Cecily.  Why?  [Cuts a flower.]

Algernon.  Because you are like a pink rose, Cousin Cecily.

Cecily.  I don't think it can be right for you to talk to me like that.
Miss Prism never says such things to me.

Algernon.  Then Miss Prism is a short-sighted old lady.  [Cecily puts the
rose in his buttonhole.]  You are the prettiest girl I ever saw.

Cecily.  Miss Prism says that all good looks are a snare.

Algernon.  They are a snare that every sensible man would like to be
caught in.

Cecily.  Oh, I don't think I would care to catch a sensible man.  I
shouldn't know what to talk to him about.

[They pass into the house.  Miss Prism and Dr. Chasuble return.]

Miss Prism.  You are too much alone, dear Dr. Chasuble.  You should get
married.  A misanthrope I can understand--a womanthrope, never!

Chasuble.  [With a scholar's shudder.]  Believe me, I do not deserve so
neologistic a phrase.  The precept as well as the practice of the
Primitive Church was distinctly against matrimony.

Miss Prism.  [Sententiously.]  That is obviously the reason why the
Primitive Church has not lasted up to the present day.  And you do not
seem to realise, dear Doctor, that by persistently remaining single, a
man converts himself into a permanent public temptation.  Men should be
more careful; this very celibacy leads weaker vessels astray.

Chasuble.  But is a man not equally attractive when married?

Miss Prism.  No married man is ever attractive except to his wife.

Chasuble.  And often, I've been told, not even to her.

Miss Prism.  That depends on the intellectual sympathies of the woman.
Maturity can always be depended on.  Ripeness can be trusted.  Young
women are green.  [Dr. Chasuble starts.]  I spoke horticulturally.  My
metaphor was drawn from fruits.  But where is Cecily?

Chasuble.  Perhaps she followed us to the schools.

[Enter Jack slowly from the back of the garden.  He is dressed in the
deepest mourning, with crape hatband and black gloves.]

Miss Prism.  Mr. Worthing!

Chasuble.  Mr. Worthing?

Miss Prism.  This is indeed a surprise.  We did not look for you till
Monday afternoon.

Jack.  [Shakes Miss Prism's hand in a tragic manner.]  I have returned
sooner than I expected.  Dr. Chasuble, I hope you are well?

Chasuble.  Dear Mr. Worthing, I trust this garb of woe does not betoken
some terrible calamity?

Jack.  My brother.

Miss Prism.  More shameful debts and extravagance?

Chasuble.  Still leading his life of pleasure?

Jack.  [Shaking his head.]  Dead!

Chasuble.  Your brother Ernest dead?

Jack.  Quite dead.

Miss Prism.  What a lesson for him!  I trust he will profit by it.

Chasuble.  Mr. Worthing, I offer you my sincere condolence.  You have at
least the consolation of knowing that you were always the most generous
and forgiving of brothers.

Jack.  Poor Ernest!  He had many faults, but it is a sad, sad blow.

Chasuble.  Very sad indeed.  Were you with him at the end?

Jack.  No.  He died abroad; in Paris, in fact.  I had a telegram last
night from the manager of the Grand Hotel.

Chasuble.  Was the cause of death mentioned?

Jack.  A severe chill, it seems.

Miss Prism.  As a man sows, so shall he reap.

Chasuble.  [Raising his hand.]  Charity, dear Miss Prism, charity!  None
of us are perfect.  I myself am peculiarly susceptible to draughts.  Will
the interment take place here?

Jack.  No.  He seems to have expressed a desire to be buried in Paris.

Chasuble.  In Paris!  [Shakes his head.]  I fear that hardly points to
any very serious state of mind at the last.  You would no doubt wish me
to make some slight allusion to this tragic domestic affliction next
Sunday.  [Jack presses his hand convulsively.]  My sermon on the meaning
of the manna in the wilderness can be adapted to almost any occasion,
joyful, or, as in the present case, distressing.  [All sigh.]  I have
preached it at harvest celebrations, christenings, confirmations, on days
of humiliation and festal days.  The last time I delivered it was in the
Cathedral, as a charity sermon on behalf of the Society for the
Prevention of Discontent among the Upper Orders.  The Bishop, who was
present, was much struck by some of the analogies I drew.

Jack.  Ah! that reminds me, you mentioned christenings I think, Dr.
Chasuble?  I suppose you know how to christen all right?  [Dr. Chasuble
looks astounded.]  I mean, of course, you are continually christening,
aren't you?

Miss Prism.  It is, I regret to say, one of the Rector's most constant
duties in this parish.  I have often spoken to the poorer classes on the
subject.  But they don't seem to know what thrift is.

Chasuble.  But is there any particular infant in whom you are interested,
Mr. Worthing?  Your brother was, I believe, unmarried, was he not?

Jack.  Oh yes.

Miss Prism.  [Bitterly.]  People who live entirely for pleasure usually
are.

Jack.  But it is not for any child, dear Doctor.  I am very fond of
children.  No! the fact is, I would like to be christened myself, this
afternoon, if you have nothing better to do.

Chasuble.  But surely, Mr. Worthing, you have been christened already?

Jack.  I don't remember anything about it.

Chasuble.  But have you any grave doubts on the subject?

Jack.  I certainly intend to have.  Of course I don't know if the thing
would bother you in any way, or if you think I am a little too old now.

Chasuble.  Not at all.  The sprinkling, and, indeed, the immersion of
adults is a perfectly canonical practice.

Jack.  Immersion!

Chasuble.  You need have no apprehensions.  Sprinkling is all that is
necessary, or indeed I think advisable.  Our weather is so changeable.  At
what hour would you wish the ceremony performed?

Jack.  Oh, I might trot round about five if that would suit you.

Chasuble.  Perfectly, perfectly!  In fact I have two similar ceremonies
to perform at that time.  A case of twins that occurred recently in one
of the outlying cottages on your own estate.  Poor Jenkins the carter, a
most hard-working man.

Jack.  Oh!  I don't see much fun in being christened along with other
babies.  It would be childish.  Would half-past five do?

Chasuble.  Admirably!  Admirably!  [Takes out watch.]  And now, dear Mr.
Worthing, I will not intrude any longer into a house of sorrow.  I would
merely beg you not to be too much bowed down by grief.  What seem to us
bitter trials are often blessings in disguise.

Miss Prism.  This seems to me a blessing of an extremely obvious kind.

[Enter Cecily from the house.]

Cecily.  Uncle Jack!  Oh, I am pleased to see you back.  But what horrid
clothes you have got on!  Do go and change them.

Miss Prism.  Cecily!

Chasuble.  My child! my child!  [Cecily goes towards Jack; he kisses her
brow in a melancholy manner.]

Cecily.  What is the matter, Uncle Jack?  Do look happy!  You look as if
you had toothache, and I have got such a surprise for you.  Who do you
think is in the dining-room?  Your brother!

Jack.  Who?

Cecily.  Your brother Ernest.  He arrived about half an hour ago.

Jack.  What nonsense!  I haven't got a brother.

Cecily.  Oh, don't say that.  However badly he may have behaved to you in
the past he is still your brother.  You couldn't be so heartless as to
disown him.  I'll tell him to come out.  And you will shake hands with
him, won't you, Uncle Jack?  [Runs back into the house.]

Chasuble.  These are very joyful tidings.

Miss Prism.  After we had all been resigned to his loss, his sudden
return seems to me peculiarly distressing.

Jack.  My brother is in the dining-room?  I don't know what it all means.
I think it is perfectly absurd.

[Enter Algernon and Cecily hand in hand.  They come slowly up to Jack.]

Jack.  Good heavens!  [Motions Algernon away.]

Algernon.  Brother John, I have come down from town to tell you that I am
very sorry for all the trouble I have given you, and that I intend to
lead a better life in the future.  [Jack glares at him and does not take
his hand.]

Cecily.  Uncle Jack, you are not going to refuse your own brother's hand?

Jack.  Nothing will induce me to take his hand.  I think his coming down
here disgraceful.  He knows perfectly well why.

Cecily.  Uncle Jack, do be nice.  There is some good in every one.  Ernest
has just been telling me about his poor invalid friend Mr. Bunbury whom
he goes to visit so often.  And surely there must be much good in one who
is kind to an invalid, and leaves the pleasures of London to sit by a bed
of pain.

Jack.  Oh! he has been talking about Bunbury, has he?

Cecily.  Yes, he has told me all about poor Mr. Bunbury, and his terrible
state of health.

Jack.  Bunbury!  Well, I won't have him talk to you about Bunbury or
about anything else.  It is enough to drive one perfectly frantic.

Algernon.  Of course I admit that the faults were all on my side.  But I
must say that I think that Brother John's coldness to me is peculiarly
painful.  I expected a more enthusiastic welcome, especially considering
it is the first time I have come here.

Cecily.  Uncle Jack, if you don't shake hands with Ernest I will never
forgive you.

Jack.  Never forgive me?

Cecily.  Never, never, never!

Jack.  Well, this is the last time I shall ever do it.  [Shakes with
Algernon and glares.]

Chasuble.  It's pleasant, is it not, to see so perfect a reconciliation?
I think we might leave the two brothers together.

Miss Prism.  Cecily, you will come with us.

Cecily.  Certainly, Miss Prism.  My little task of reconciliation is
over.

Chasuble.  You have done a beautiful action to-day, dear child.

Miss Prism.  We must not be premature in our judgments.

Cecily.  I feel very happy.  [They all go off except Jack and Algernon.]

Jack.  You young scoundrel, Algy, you must get out of this place as soon
as possible.  I don't allow any Bunburying here.

[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  I have put Mr. Ernest's things in the room next to yours, sir.
I suppose that is all right?

Jack.  What?

Merriman.  Mr. Ernest's luggage, sir.  I have unpacked it and put it in
the room next to your own.

Jack.  His luggage?

Merriman.  Yes, sir.  Three portmanteaus, a dressing-case, two hat-boxes,
and a large luncheon-basket.

Algernon.  I am afraid I can't stay more than a week this time.

Jack.  Merriman, order the dog-cart at once.  Mr. Ernest has been
suddenly called back to town.

Merriman.  Yes, sir.  [Goes back into the house.]

Algernon.  What a fearful liar you are, Jack.  I have not been called
back to town at all.

Jack.  Yes, you have.

Algernon.  I haven't heard any one call me.

Jack.  Your duty as a gentleman calls you back.

Algernon.  My duty as a gentleman has never interfered with my pleasures
in the smallest degree.

Jack.  I can quite understand that.

Algernon.  Well, Cecily is a darling.

Jack.  You are not to talk of Miss Cardew like that.  I don't like it.

Algernon.  Well, I don't like your clothes.  You look perfectly
ridiculous in them.  Why on earth don't you go up and change?  It is
perfectly childish to be in deep mourning for a man who is actually
staying for a whole week with you in your house as a guest.  I call it
grotesque.

Jack.  You are certainly not staying with me for a whole week as a guest
or anything else.  You have got to leave . . . by the four-five train.

Algernon.  I certainly won't leave you so long as you are in mourning.  It
would be most unfriendly.  If I were in mourning you would stay with me,
I suppose.  I should think it very unkind if you didn't.

Jack.  Well, will you go if I change my clothes?

Algernon.  Yes, if you are not too long.  I never saw anybody take so
long to dress, and with such little result.

Jack.  Well, at any rate, that is better than being always over-dressed
as you are.

Algernon.  If I am occasionally a little over-dressed, I make up for it
by being always immensely over-educated.

Jack.  Your vanity is ridiculous, your conduct an outrage, and your
presence in my garden utterly absurd.  However, you have got to catch the
four-five, and I hope you will have a pleasant journey back to town.  This
Bunburying, as you call it, has not been a great success for you.

[Goes into the house.]

Algernon.  I think it has been a great success.  I'm in love with Cecily,
and that is everything.

[Enter Cecily at the back of the garden.  She picks up the can and begins
to water the flowers.]  But I must see her before I go, and make
arrangements for another Bunbury.  Ah, there she is.

Cecily.  Oh, I merely came back to water the roses.  I thought you were
with Uncle Jack.

Algernon.  He's gone to order the dog-cart for me.

Cecily.  Oh, is he going to take you for a nice drive?

Algernon.  He's going to send me away.

Cecily.  Then have we got to part?

Algernon.  I am afraid so.  It's a very painful parting.

Cecily.  It is always painful to part from people whom one has known for
a very brief space of time.  The absence of old friends one can endure
with equanimity.  But even a momentary separation from anyone to whom one
has just been introduced is almost unbearable.

Algernon.  Thank you.

[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  The dog-cart is at the door, sir.  [Algernon looks appealingly
at Cecily.]

Cecily.  It can wait, Merriman for . . . five minutes.

Merriman.  Yes, Miss.  [Exit Merriman.]

Algernon.  I hope, Cecily, I shall not offend you if I state quite
frankly and openly that you seem to me to be in every way the visible
personification of absolute perfection.

Cecily.  I think your frankness does you great credit, Ernest.  If you
will allow me, I will copy your remarks into my diary.  [Goes over to
table and begins writing in diary.]

Algernon.  Do you really keep a diary?  I'd give anything to look at it.
May I?

Cecily.  Oh no.  [Puts her hand over it.]  You see, it is simply a very
young girl's record of her own thoughts and impressions, and consequently
meant for publication.  When it appears in volume form I hope you will
order a copy.  But pray, Ernest, don't stop.  I delight in taking down
from dictation.  I have reached 'absolute perfection'.  You can go on.  I
am quite ready for more.

Algernon.  [Somewhat taken aback.]  Ahem!  Ahem!

Cecily.  Oh, don't cough, Ernest.  When one is dictating one should speak
fluently and not cough.  Besides, I don't know how to spell a cough.
[Writes as Algernon speaks.]

Algernon.  [Speaking very rapidly.]  Cecily, ever since I first looked
upon your wonderful and incomparable beauty, I have dared to love you
wildly, passionately, devotedly, hopelessly.

Cecily.  I don't think that you should tell me that you love me wildly,
passionately, devotedly, hopelessly.  Hopelessly doesn't seem to make
much sense, does it?

Algernon.  Cecily!

[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  The dog-cart is waiting, sir.

Algernon.  Tell it to come round next week, at the same hour.

Merriman.  [Looks at Cecily, who makes no sign.]  Yes, sir.

[Merriman retires.]

Cecily.  Uncle Jack would be very much annoyed if he knew you were
staying on till next week, at the same hour.

Algernon.  Oh, I don't care about Jack.  I don't care for anybody in the
whole world but you.  I love you, Cecily.  You will marry me, won't you?

Cecily.  You silly boy!  Of course.  Why, we have been engaged for the
last three months.

Algernon.  For the last three months?

Cecily.  Yes, it will be exactly three months on Thursday.

Algernon.  But how did we become engaged?

Cecily.  Well, ever since dear Uncle Jack first confessed to us that he
had a younger brother who was very wicked and bad, you of course have
formed the chief topic of conversation between myself and Miss Prism.  And
of course a man who is much talked about is always very attractive.  One
feels there must be something in him, after all.  I daresay it was
foolish of me, but I fell in love with you, Ernest.

Algernon.  Darling!  And when was the engagement actually settled?

Cecily.  On the 14th of February last.  Worn out by your entire ignorance
of my existence, I determined to end the matter one way or the other, and
after a long struggle with myself I accepted you under this dear old tree
here.  The next day I bought this little ring in your name, and this is
the little bangle with the true lover's knot I promised you always to
wear.

Algernon.  Did I give you this?  It's very pretty, isn't it?

Cecily.  Yes, you've wonderfully good taste, Ernest.  It's the excuse
I've always given for your leading such a bad life.  And this is the box
in which I keep all your dear letters.  [Kneels at table, opens box, and
produces letters tied up with blue ribbon.]

Algernon.  My letters!  But, my own sweet Cecily, I have never written
you any letters.

Cecily.  You need hardly remind me of that, Ernest.  I remember only too
well that I was forced to write your letters for you.  I wrote always
three times a week, and sometimes oftener.

Algernon.  Oh, do let me read them, Cecily?

Cecily.  Oh, I couldn't possibly.  They would make you far too conceited.
[Replaces box.]  The three you wrote me after I had broken off the
engagement are so beautiful, and so badly spelled, that even now I can
hardly read them without crying a little.

Algernon.  But was our engagement ever broken off?

Cecily.  Of course it was.  On the 22nd of last March.  You can see the
entry if you like. [Shows diary.]  'To-day I broke off my engagement with
Ernest.  I feel it is better to do so.  The weather still continues
charming.'

Algernon.  But why on earth did you break it off?  What had I done?  I
had done nothing at all.  Cecily, I am very much hurt indeed to hear you
broke it off.  Particularly when the weather was so charming.

Cecily.  It would hardly have been a really serious engagement if it
hadn't been broken off at least once.  But I forgave you before the week
was out.

Algernon.  [Crossing to her, and kneeling.]  What a perfect angel you
are, Cecily.

Cecily.  You dear romantic boy.  [He kisses her, she puts her fingers
through his hair.]  I hope your hair curls naturally, does it?

Algernon.  Yes, darling, with a little help from others.

Cecily.  I am so glad.

Algernon.  You'll never break off our engagement again, Cecily?

Cecily.  I don't think I could break it off now that I have actually met
you.  Besides, of course, there is the question of your name.

Algernon.  Yes, of course.  [Nervously.]

Cecily.  You must not laugh at me, darling, but it had always been a
girlish dream of mine to love some one whose name was Ernest.  [Algernon
rises, Cecily also.]  There is something in that name that seems to
inspire absolute confidence.  I pity any poor married woman whose husband
is not called Ernest.

Algernon.  But, my dear child, do you mean to say you could not love me
if I had some other name?

Cecily.  But what name?

Algernon.  Oh, any name you like--Algernon--for instance . . .

Cecily.  But I don't like the name of Algernon.

Algernon.  Well, my own dear, sweet, loving little darling, I really
can't see why you should object to the name of Algernon.  It is not at
all a bad name.  In fact, it is rather an aristocratic name.  Half of the
chaps who get into the Bankruptcy Court are called Algernon.  But
seriously, Cecily . . . [Moving to her] . . . if my name was Algy,
couldn't you love me?

Cecily.  [Rising.]  I might respect you, Ernest, I might admire your
character, but I fear that I should not be able to give you my undivided
attention.

Algernon.  Ahem!  Cecily!  [Picking up hat.]  Your Rector here is, I
suppose, thoroughly experienced in the practice of all the rites and
ceremonials of the Church?

Cecily.  Oh, yes.  Dr. Chasuble is a most learned man.  He has never
written a single book, so you can imagine how much he knows.

Algernon.  I must see him at once on a most important christening--I mean
on most important business.

Cecily.  Oh!

Algernon.  I shan't be away more than half an hour.

Cecily.  Considering that we have been engaged since February the 14th,
and that I only met you to-day for the first time, I think it is rather
hard that you should leave me for so long a period as half an hour.
Couldn't you make it twenty minutes?

Algernon.  I'll be back in no time.

[Kisses her and rushes down the garden.]

Cecily.  What an impetuous boy he is!  I like his hair so much.  I must
enter his proposal in my diary.

[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  A Miss Fairfax has just called to see Mr. Worthing.  On very
important business, Miss Fairfax states.

Cecily.  Isn't Mr. Worthing in his library?

Merriman.  Mr. Worthing went over in the direction of the Rectory some
time ago.

Cecily.  Pray ask the lady to come out here; Mr. Worthing is sure to be
back soon.  And you can bring tea.

Merriman.  Yes, Miss.  [Goes out.]

Cecily.  Miss Fairfax!  I suppose one of the many good elderly women who
are associated with Uncle Jack in some of his philanthropic work in
London.  I don't quite like women who are interested in philanthropic
work.  I think it is so forward of them.

[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  Miss Fairfax.

[Enter Gwendolen.]

[Exit Merriman.]

Cecily.  [Advancing to meet her.]  Pray let me introduce myself to you.
My name is Cecily Cardew.

Gwendolen.  Cecily Cardew?  [Moving to her and shaking hands.]  What a
very sweet name!  Something tells me that we are going to be great
friends.  I like you already more than I can say.  My first impressions
of people are never wrong.

Cecily.  How nice of you to like me so much after we have known each
other such a comparatively short time.  Pray sit down.

Gwendolen.  [Still standing up.]  I may call you Cecily, may I not?

Cecily.  With pleasure!

Gwendolen.  And you will always call me Gwendolen, won't you?

Cecily.  If you wish.

Gwendolen.  Then that is all quite settled, is it not?

Cecily.  I hope so.  [A pause.  They both sit down together.]

Gwendolen.  Perhaps this might be a favourable opportunity for my
mentioning who I am.  My father is Lord Bracknell.  You have never heard
of papa, I suppose?

Cecily.  I don't think so.

Gwendolen.  Outside the family circle, papa, I am glad to say, is
entirely unknown.  I think that is quite as it should be.  The home seems
to me to be the proper sphere for the man.  And certainly once a man
begins to neglect his domestic duties he becomes painfully effeminate,
does he not?  And I don't like that.  It makes men so very attractive.
Cecily, mamma, whose views on education are remarkably strict, has
brought me up to be extremely short-sighted; it is part of her system; so
do you mind my looking at you through my glasses?

Cecily.  Oh! not at all, Gwendolen.  I am very fond of being looked at.

Gwendolen.  [After examining Cecily carefully through a lorgnette.]  You
are here on a short visit, I suppose.

Cecily.  Oh no!  I live here.

Gwendolen.  [Severely.]  Really?  Your mother, no doubt, or some female
relative of advanced years, resides here also?

Cecily.  Oh no!  I have no mother, nor, in fact, any relations.

Gwendolen.  Indeed?

Cecily.  My dear guardian, with the assistance of Miss Prism, has the
arduous task of looking after me.

Gwendolen.  Your guardian?

Cecily.  Yes, I am Mr. Worthing's ward.

Gwendolen.  Oh!  It is strange he never mentioned to me that he had a
ward.  How secretive of him!  He grows more interesting hourly.  I am not
sure, however, that the news inspires me with feelings of unmixed
delight.  [Rising and going to her.]  I am very fond of you, Cecily; I
have liked you ever since I met you!  But I am bound to state that now
that I know that you are Mr. Worthing's ward, I cannot help expressing a
wish you were--well, just a little older than you seem to be--and not
quite so very alluring in appearance.  In fact, if I may speak candidly--

Cecily.  Pray do!  I think that whenever one has anything unpleasant to
say, one should always be quite candid.

Gwendolen.  Well, to speak with perfect candour, Cecily, I wish that you
were fully forty-two, and more than usually plain for your age.  Ernest
has a strong upright nature.  He is the very soul of truth and honour.
Disloyalty would be as impossible to him as deception.  But even men of
the noblest possible moral character are extremely susceptible to the
influence of the physical charms of others.  Modern, no less than Ancient
History, supplies us with many most painful examples of what I refer to.
If it were not so, indeed, History would be quite unreadable.

Cecily.  I beg your pardon, Gwendolen, did you say Ernest?

Gwendolen.  Yes.

Cecily.  Oh, but it is not Mr. Ernest Worthing who is my guardian.  It is
his brother--his elder brother.

Gwendolen.  [Sitting down again.]  Ernest never mentioned to me that he
had a brother.

Cecily.  I am sorry to say they have not been on good terms for a long
time.

Gwendolen.  Ah! that accounts for it.  And now that I think of it I have
never heard any man mention his brother.  The subject seems distasteful
to most men.  Cecily, you have lifted a load from my mind.  I was growing
almost anxious.  It would have been terrible if any cloud had come across
a friendship like ours, would it not?  Of course you are quite, quite
sure that it is not Mr. Ernest Worthing who is your guardian?

Cecily.  Quite sure.  [A pause.]  In fact, I am going to be his.

Gwendolen.  [Inquiringly.]  I beg your pardon?

Cecily.  [Rather shy and confidingly.]  Dearest Gwendolen, there is no
reason why I should make a secret of it to you.  Our little county
newspaper is sure to chronicle the fact next week.  Mr. Ernest Worthing
and I are engaged to be married.

Gwendolen.  [Quite politely, rising.]  My darling Cecily, I think there
must be some slight error.  Mr. Ernest Worthing is engaged to me.  The
announcement will appear in the _Morning Post_ on Saturday at the latest.

Cecily.  [Very politely, rising.]  I am afraid you must be under some
misconception.  Ernest proposed to me exactly ten minutes ago.  [Shows
diary.]

Gwendolen.  [Examines diary through her lorgnettte carefully.]  It is
certainly very curious, for he asked me to be his wife yesterday
afternoon at 5.30.  If you would care to verify the incident, pray do so.
[Produces diary of her own.]  I never travel without my diary.  One
should always have something sensational to read in the train.  I am so
sorry, dear Cecily, if it is any disappointment to you, but I am afraid I
have the prior claim.

Cecily.  It would distress me more than I can tell you, dear Gwendolen,
if it caused you any mental or physical anguish, but I feel bound to
point out that since Ernest proposed to you he clearly has changed his
mind.

Gwendolen.  [Meditatively.]  If the poor fellow has been entrapped into
any foolish promise I shall consider it my duty to rescue him at once,
and with a firm hand.

Cecily.  [Thoughtfully and sadly.]  Whatever unfortunate entanglement my
dear boy may have got into, I will never reproach him with it after we
are married.

Gwendolen.  Do you allude to me, Miss Cardew, as an entanglement?  You
are presumptuous.  On an occasion of this kind it becomes more than a
moral duty to speak one's mind.  It becomes a pleasure.

Cecily.  Do you suggest, Miss Fairfax, that I entrapped Ernest into an
engagement?  How dare you?  This is no time for wearing the shallow mask
of manners.  When I see a spade I call it a spade.

Gwendolen.  [Satirically.]  I am glad to say that I have never seen a
spade.  It is obvious that our social spheres have been widely different.

[Enter Merriman, followed by the footman.  He carries a salver, table
cloth, and plate stand.  Cecily is about to retort.  The presence of the
servants exercises a restraining influence, under which both girls
chafe.]

Merriman.  Shall I lay tea here as usual, Miss?

Cecily.  [Sternly, in a calm voice.]  Yes, as usual.  [Merriman begins to
clear table and lay cloth.  A long pause.  Cecily and Gwendolen glare at
each other.]

Gwendolen.  Are there many interesting walks in the vicinity, Miss
Cardew?

Cecily.  Oh! yes! a great many.  From the top of one of the hills quite
close one can see five counties.

Gwendolen.  Five counties!  I don't think I should like that; I hate
crowds.

Cecily.  [Sweetly.]  I suppose that is why you live in town?  [Gwendolen
bites her lip, and beats her foot nervously with her parasol.]

Gwendolen.  [Looking round.]  Quite a well-kept garden this is, Miss
Cardew.

Cecily.  So glad you like it, Miss Fairfax.

Gwendolen.  I had no idea there were any flowers in the country.

Cecily.  Oh, flowers are as common here, Miss Fairfax, as people are in
London.

Gwendolen.  Personally I cannot understand how anybody manages to exist
in the country, if anybody who is anybody does.  The country always bores
me to death.

Cecily.  Ah!  This is what the newspapers call agricultural depression,
is it not?  I believe the aristocracy are suffering very much from it
just at present.  It is almost an epidemic amongst them, I have been
told.  May I offer you some tea, Miss Fairfax?

Gwendolen.  [With elaborate politeness.]  Thank you.  [Aside.]  Detestable
girl!  But I require tea!

Cecily.  [Sweetly.]  Sugar?

Gwendolen.  [Superciliously.]  No, thank you.  Sugar is not fashionable
any more. [Cecily looks angrily at her, takes up the tongs and puts four
lumps of sugar into the cup.]

Cecily.  [Severely.]  Cake or bread and butter?

Gwendolen.  [In a bored manner.]  Bread and butter, please.  Cake is
rarely seen at the best houses nowadays.

Cecily.  [Cuts a very large slice of cake, and puts it on the tray.]  Hand
that to Miss Fairfax.

[Merriman does so, and goes out with footman.  Gwendolen drinks the tea
and makes a grimace.  Puts down cup at once, reaches out her hand to the
bread and butter, looks at it, and finds it is cake.  Rises in
indignation.]

Gwendolen.  You have filled my tea with lumps of sugar, and though I
asked most distinctly for bread and butter, you have given me cake.  I am
known for the gentleness of my disposition, and the extraordinary
sweetness of my nature, but I warn you, Miss Cardew, you may go too far.

Cecily.  [Rising.]  To save my poor, innocent, trusting boy from the
machinations of any other girl there are no lengths to which I would not
go.

Gwendolen.  From the moment I saw you I distrusted you.  I felt that you
were false and deceitful.  I am never deceived in such matters.  My first
impressions of people are invariably right.

Cecily.  It seems to me, Miss Fairfax, that I am trespassing on your
valuable time.  No doubt you have many other calls of a similar character
to make in the neighbourhood.

[Enter Jack.]

Gwendolen.  [Catching sight of him.]  Ernest!  My own Ernest!

Jack.  Gwendolen!  Darling!  [Offers to kiss her.]

Gwendolen.  [Draws back.]  A moment!  May I ask if you are engaged to be
married to this young lady?  [Points to Cecily.]

Jack.  [Laughing.]  To dear little Cecily!  Of course not!  What could
have put such an idea into your pretty little head?

Gwendolen.  Thank you.  You may!  [Offers her cheek.]

Cecily.  [Very sweetly.]  I knew there must be some misunderstanding,
Miss Fairfax.  The gentleman whose arm is at present round your waist is
my guardian, Mr. John Worthing.

Gwendolen.  I beg your pardon?

Cecily.  This is Uncle Jack.

Gwendolen.  [Receding.]  Jack!  Oh!

[Enter Algernon.]

Cecily.  Here is Ernest.

Algernon.  [Goes straight over to Cecily without noticing any one else.]
My own love!  [Offers to kiss her.]

Cecily.  [Drawing back.]  A moment, Ernest!  May I ask you--are you
engaged to be married to this young lady?

Algernon.  [Looking round.]  To what young lady?  Good heavens!
Gwendolen!

Cecily.  Yes! to good heavens, Gwendolen, I mean to Gwendolen.

Algernon.  [Laughing.]  Of course not!  What could have put such an idea
into your pretty little head?

Cecily.  Thank you.  [Presenting her cheek to be kissed.]  You may.
[Algernon kisses her.]

Gwendolen.  I felt there was some slight error, Miss Cardew.  The
gentleman who is now embracing you is my cousin, Mr. Algernon Moncrieff.

Cecily.  [Breaking away from Algernon.]  Algernon Moncrieff!  Oh!  [The
two girls move towards each other and put their arms round each other's
waists as if for protection.]

Cecily.  Are you called Algernon?

Algernon.  I cannot deny it.

Cecily.  Oh!

Gwendolen.  Is your name really John?

Jack.  [Standing rather proudly.]  I could deny it if I liked.  I could
deny anything if I liked.  But my name certainly is John.  It has been
John for years.

Cecily.  [To Gwendolen.]  A gross deception has been practised on both of
us.

Gwendolen.  My poor wounded Cecily!

Cecily.  My sweet wronged Gwendolen!

Gwendolen.  [Slowly and seriously.]  You will call me sister, will you
not?  [They embrace.  Jack and Algernon groan and walk up and down.]

Cecily.  [Rather brightly.]  There is just one question I would like to
be allowed to ask my guardian.

Gwendolen.  An admirable idea!  Mr. Worthing, there is just one question
I would like to be permitted to put to you.  Where is your brother
Ernest?  We are both engaged to be married to your brother Ernest, so it
is a matter of some importance to us to know where your brother Ernest is
at present.

Jack.  [Slowly and hesitatingly.]  Gwendolen--Cecily--it is very painful
for me to be forced to speak the truth.  It is the first time in my life
that I have ever been reduced to such a painful position, and I am really
quite inexperienced in doing anything of the kind.  However, I will tell
you quite frankly that I have no brother Ernest.  I have no brother at
all.  I never had a brother in my life, and I certainly have not the
smallest intention of ever having one in the future.

Cecily.  [Surprised.]  No brother at all?

Jack.  [Cheerily.]  None!

Gwendolen.  [Severely.]  Had you never a brother of any kind?

Jack.  [Pleasantly.]  Never.  Not even of any kind.

Gwendolen.  I am afraid it is quite clear, Cecily, that neither of us is
engaged to be married to any one.

Cecily.  It is not a very pleasant position for a young girl suddenly to
find herself in.  Is it?

Gwendolen.  Let us go into the house.  They will hardly venture to come
after us there.

Cecily.  No, men are so cowardly, aren't they?

[They retire into the house with scornful looks.]

Jack.  This ghastly state of things is what you call Bunburying, I
suppose?

Algernon.  Yes, and a perfectly wonderful Bunbury it is.  The most
wonderful Bunbury I have ever had in my life.

Jack.  Well, you've no right whatsoever to Bunbury here.

Algernon.  That is absurd.  One has a right to Bunbury anywhere one
chooses.  Every serious Bunburyist knows that.

Jack.  Serious Bunburyist!  Good heavens!

Algernon.  Well, one must be serious about something, if one wants to
have any amusement in life.  I happen to be serious about Bunburying.
What on earth you are serious about I haven't got the remotest idea.
About everything, I should fancy.  You have such an absolutely trivial
nature.

Jack.  Well, the only small satisfaction I have in the whole of this
wretched business is that your friend Bunbury is quite exploded.  You
won't be able to run down to the country quite so often as you used to
do, dear Algy.  And a very good thing too.

Algernon.  Your brother is a little off colour, isn't he, dear Jack?  You
won't be able to disappear to London quite so frequently as your wicked
custom was.  And not a bad thing either.

Jack.  As for your conduct towards Miss Cardew, I must say that your
taking in a sweet, simple, innocent girl like that is quite inexcusable.
To say nothing of the fact that she is my ward.

Algernon.  I can see no possible defence at all for your deceiving a
brilliant, clever, thoroughly experienced young lady like Miss Fairfax.
To say nothing of the fact that she is my cousin.

Jack.  I wanted to be engaged to Gwendolen, that is all.  I love her.

Algernon.  Well, I simply wanted to be engaged to Cecily.  I adore her.

Jack.  There is certainly no chance of your marrying Miss Cardew.

Algernon.  I don't think there is much likelihood, Jack, of you and Miss
Fairfax being united.

Jack.  Well, that is no business of yours.

Algernon.  If it was my business, I wouldn't talk about it.  [Begins to
eat muffins.]  It is very vulgar to talk about one's business.  Only
people like stock-brokers do that, and then merely at dinner parties.

Jack.  How can you sit there, calmly eating muffins when we are in this
horrible trouble, I can't make out.  You seem to me to be perfectly
heartless.

Algernon.  Well, I can't eat muffins in an agitated manner.  The butter
would probably get on my cuffs.  One should always eat muffins quite
calmly.  It is the only way to eat them.

Jack.  I say it's perfectly heartless your eating muffins at all, under
the circumstances.

Algernon.  When I am in trouble, eating is the only thing that consoles
me.  Indeed, when I am in really great trouble, as any one who knows me
intimately will tell you, I refuse everything except food and drink.  At
the present moment I am eating muffins because I am unhappy.  Besides, I
am particularly fond of muffins.  [Rising.]

Jack.  [Rising.]  Well, that is no reason why you should eat them all in
that greedy way. [Takes muffins from Algernon.]

Algernon.  [Offering tea-cake.]  I wish you would have tea-cake instead.
I don't like tea-cake.

Jack.  Good heavens!  I suppose a man may eat his own muffins in his own
garden.

Algernon.  But you have just said it was perfectly heartless to eat
muffins.

Jack.  I said it was perfectly heartless of you, under the circumstances.
That is a very different thing.

Algernon.  That may be.  But the muffins are the same.  [He seizes the
muffin-dish from Jack.]

Jack.  Algy, I wish to goodness you would go.

Algernon.  You can't possibly ask me to go without having some dinner.
It's absurd.  I never go without my dinner.  No one ever does, except
vegetarians and people like that.  Besides I have just made arrangements
with Dr. Chasuble to be christened at a quarter to six under the name of
Ernest.

Jack.  My dear fellow, the sooner you give up that nonsense the better.  I
made arrangements this morning with Dr. Chasuble to be christened myself
at 5.30, and I naturally will take the name of Ernest.  Gwendolen would
wish it.  We can't both be christened Ernest.  It's absurd.  Besides, I
have a perfect right to be christened if I like.  There is no evidence at
all that I have ever been christened by anybody.  I should think it
extremely probable I never was, and so does Dr. Chasuble.  It is entirely
different in your case.  You have been christened already.

Algernon.  Yes, but I have not been christened for years.

Jack.  Yes, but you have been christened.  That is the important thing.

Algernon.  Quite so.  So I know my constitution can stand it.  If you are
not quite sure about your ever having been christened, I must say I think
it rather dangerous your venturing on it now.  It might make you very
unwell.  You can hardly have forgotten that some one very closely
connected with you was very nearly carried off this week in Paris by a
severe chill.

Jack.  Yes, but you said yourself that a severe chill was not hereditary.

Algernon.  It usen't to be, I know--but I daresay it is now.  Science is
always making wonderful improvements in things.

Jack.  [Picking up the muffin-dish.]  Oh, that is nonsense; you are
always talking nonsense.

Algernon.  Jack, you are at the muffins again!  I wish you wouldn't.
There are only two left.  [Takes them.]  I told you I was particularly
fond of muffins.

Jack.  But I hate tea-cake.

Algernon.  Why on earth then do you allow tea-cake to be served up for
your guests?  What ideas you have of hospitality!

Jack.  Algernon!  I have already told you to go.  I don't want you here.
Why don't you go!

Algernon.  I haven't quite finished my tea yet! and there is still one
muffin left.  [Jack groans, and sinks into a chair.  Algernon still
continues eating.]

ACT DROP




THIRD ACT


SCENE


Morning-room at the Manor House.

[Gwendolen and Cecily are at the window, looking out into the garden.]

Gwendolen.  The fact that they did not follow us at once into the house,
as any one else would have done, seems to me to show that they have some
sense of shame left.

Cecily.  They have been eating muffins.  That looks like repentance.

Gwendolen.  [After a pause.]  They don't seem to notice us at all.
Couldn't you cough?

Cecily.  But I haven't got a cough.

Gwendolen.  They're looking at us.  What effrontery!

Cecily.  They're approaching.  That's very forward of them.

Gwendolen.  Let us preserve a dignified silence.

Cecily.  Certainly.  It's the only thing to do now.  [Enter Jack followed
by Algernon.  They whistle some dreadful popular air from a British
Opera.]

Gwendolen.  This dignified silence seems to produce an unpleasant effect.

Cecily.  A most distasteful one.

Gwendolen.  But we will not be the first to speak.

Cecily.  Certainly not.

Gwendolen.  Mr. Worthing, I have something very particular to ask you.
Much depends on your reply.

Cecily.  Gwendolen, your common sense is invaluable.  Mr. Moncrieff,
kindly answer me the following question.  Why did you pretend to be my
guardian's brother?

Algernon.  In order that I might have an opportunity of meeting you.

Cecily.  [To Gwendolen.]  That certainly seems a satisfactory
explanation, does it not?

Gwendolen.  Yes, dear, if you can believe him.

Cecily.  I don't.  But that does not affect the wonderful beauty of his
answer.

Gwendolen.  True.  In matters of grave importance, style, not sincerity
is the vital thing.  Mr. Worthing, what explanation can you offer to me
for pretending to have a brother?  Was it in order that you might have an
opportunity of coming up to town to see me as often as possible?

Jack.  Can you doubt it, Miss Fairfax?

Gwendolen.  I have the gravest doubts upon the subject.  But I intend to
crush them.  This is not the moment for German scepticism.  [Moving to
Cecily.]  Their explanations appear to be quite satisfactory, especially
Mr. Worthing's.  That seems to me to have the stamp of truth upon it.

Cecily.  I am more than content with what Mr. Moncrieff said.  His voice
alone inspires one with absolute credulity.

Gwendolen.  Then you think we should forgive them?

Cecily.  Yes.  I mean no.

Gwendolen.  True!  I had forgotten.  There are principles at stake that
one cannot surrender.  Which of us should tell them?  The task is not a
pleasant one.

Cecily.  Could we not both speak at the same time?

Gwendolen.  An excellent idea!  I nearly always speak at the same time as
other people.  Will you take the time from me?

Cecily.  Certainly.  [Gwendolen beats time with uplifted finger.]

Gwendolen and Cecily [Speaking together.]  Your Christian names are still
an insuperable barrier.  That is all!

Jack and Algernon [Speaking together.]  Our Christian names!  Is that
all?  But we are going to be christened this afternoon.

Gwendolen.  [To Jack.]  For my sake you are prepared to do this terrible
thing?

Jack.  I am.

Cecily.  [To Algernon.]  To please me you are ready to face this fearful
ordeal?

Algernon.  I am!

Gwendolen.  How absurd to talk of the equality of the sexes!  Where
questions of self-sacrifice are concerned, men are infinitely beyond us.

Jack.  We are.  [Clasps hands with Algernon.]

Cecily.  They have moments of physical courage of which we women know
absolutely nothing.

Gwendolen.  [To Jack.]  Darling!

Algernon.  [To Cecily.]  Darling!  [They fall into each other's arms.]

[Enter Merriman.  When he enters he coughs loudly, seeing the situation.]

Merriman.  Ahem!  Ahem!  Lady Bracknell!

Jack.  Good heavens!

[Enter Lady Bracknell.  The couples separate in alarm.  Exit Merriman.]

Lady Bracknell.  Gwendolen!  What does this mean?

Gwendolen.  Merely that I am engaged to be married to Mr. Worthing,
mamma.

Lady Bracknell.  Come here.  Sit down.  Sit down immediately.  Hesitation
of any kind is a sign of mental decay in the young, of physical weakness
in the old.  [Turns to Jack.]  Apprised, sir, of my daughter's sudden
flight by her trusty maid, whose confidence I purchased by means of a
small coin, I followed her at once by a luggage train.  Her unhappy
father is, I am glad to say, under the impression that she is attending a
more than usually lengthy lecture by the University Extension Scheme on
the Influence of a permanent income on Thought.  I do not propose to
undeceive him.  Indeed I have never undeceived him on any question.  I
would consider it wrong.  But of course, you will clearly understand that
all communication between yourself and my daughter must cease immediately
from this moment.  On this point, as indeed on all points, I am firm.

Jack.  I am engaged to be married to Gwendolen, Lady Bracknell!

Lady Bracknell.  You are nothing of the kind, sir.  And now, as regards
Algernon! . . . Algernon!

Algernon.  Yes, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  May I ask if it is in this house that your invalid
friend Mr. Bunbury resides?

Algernon.  [Stammering.]  Oh!  No!  Bunbury doesn't live here.  Bunbury
is somewhere else at present.  In fact, Bunbury is dead.

Lady Bracknell.  Dead!  When did Mr. Bunbury die?  His death must have
been extremely sudden.

Algernon.  [Airily.]  Oh!  I killed Bunbury this afternoon.  I mean poor
Bunbury died this afternoon.

Lady Bracknell.  What did he die of?

Algernon.  Bunbury?  Oh, he was quite exploded.

Lady Bracknell.  Exploded!  Was he the victim of a revolutionary outrage?
I was not aware that Mr. Bunbury was interested in social legislation.  If
so, he is well punished for his morbidity.

Algernon.  My dear Aunt Augusta, I mean he was found out!  The doctors
found out that Bunbury could not live, that is what I mean--so Bunbury
died.

Lady Bracknell.  He seems to have had great confidence in the opinion of
his physicians.  I am glad, however, that he made up his mind at the last
to some definite course of action, and acted under proper medical advice.
And now that we have finally got rid of this Mr. Bunbury, may I ask, Mr.
Worthing, who is that young person whose hand my nephew Algernon is now
holding in what seems to me a peculiarly unnecessary manner?

Jack.  That lady is Miss Cecily Cardew, my ward.  [Lady Bracknell bows
coldly to Cecily.]

Algernon.  I am engaged to be married to Cecily, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  I beg your pardon?

Cecily.  Mr. Moncrieff and I are engaged to be married, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  [With a shiver, crossing to the sofa and sitting down.]
I do not know whether there is anything peculiarly exciting in the air of
this particular part of Hertfordshire, but the number of engagements that
go on seems to me considerably above the proper average that statistics
have laid down for our guidance.  I think some preliminary inquiry on my
part would not be out of place.  Mr. Worthing, is Miss Cardew at all
connected with any of the larger railway stations in London?  I merely
desire information.  Until yesterday I had no idea that there were any
families or persons whose origin was a Terminus.  [Jack looks perfectly
furious, but restrains himself.]

Jack.  [In a clear, cold voice.]  Miss Cardew is the grand-daughter of
the late Mr. Thomas Cardew of 149 Belgrave Square, S.W.; Gervase Park,
Dorking, Surrey; and the Sporran, Fifeshire, N.B.

Lady Bracknell.  That sounds not unsatisfactory.  Three addresses always
inspire confidence, even in tradesmen.  But what proof have I of their
authenticity?

Jack.  I have carefully preserved the Court Guides of the period.  They
are open to your inspection, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  [Grimly.]  I have known strange errors in that
publication.

Jack.  Miss Cardew's family solicitors are Messrs. Markby, Markby, and
Markby.

Lady Bracknell.  Markby, Markby, and Markby?  A firm of the very highest
position in their profession.  Indeed I am told that one of the Mr.
Markby's is occasionally to be seen at dinner parties.  So far I am
satisfied.

Jack.  [Very irritably.]  How extremely kind of you, Lady Bracknell!  I
have also in my possession, you will be pleased to hear, certificates of
Miss Cardew's birth, baptism, whooping cough, registration, vaccination,
confirmation, and the measles; both the German and the English variety.

Lady Bracknell.  Ah! A life crowded with incident, I see; though perhaps
somewhat too exciting for a young girl.  I am not myself in favour of
premature experiences.  [Rises, looks at her watch.]  Gwendolen! the time
approaches for our departure.  We have not a moment to lose.  As a matter
of form, Mr. Worthing, I had better ask you if Miss Cardew has any little
fortune?

Jack.  Oh! about a hundred and thirty thousand pounds in the Funds.  That
is all.  Goodbye, Lady Bracknell.  So pleased to have seen you.

Lady Bracknell.  [Sitting down again.]  A moment, Mr. Worthing.  A
hundred and thirty thousand pounds!  And in the Funds!  Miss Cardew seems
to me a most attractive young lady, now that I look at her.  Few girls of
the present day have any really solid qualities, any of the qualities
that last, and improve with time.  We live, I regret to say, in an age of
surfaces.  [To Cecily.]  Come over here, dear.  [Cecily goes across.]
Pretty child! your dress is sadly simple, and your hair seems almost as
Nature might have left it.  But we can soon alter all that.  A thoroughly
experienced French maid produces a really marvellous result in a very
brief space of time.  I remember recommending one to young Lady Lancing,
and after three months her own husband did not know her.

Jack.  And after six months nobody knew her.

Lady Bracknell.  [Glares at Jack for a few moments.  Then bends, with a
practised smile, to Cecily.]  Kindly turn round, sweet child.  [Cecily
turns completely round.]  No, the side view is what I want.  [Cecily
presents her profile.]  Yes, quite as I expected.  There are distinct
social possibilities in your profile.  The two weak points in our age are
its want of principle and its want of profile.  The chin a little higher,
dear.  Style largely depends on the way the chin is worn.  They are worn
very high, just at present.  Algernon!

Algernon.  Yes, Aunt Augusta!

Lady Bracknell.  There are distinct social possibilities in Miss Cardew's
profile.

Algernon.  Cecily is the sweetest, dearest, prettiest girl in the whole
world.  And I don't care twopence about social possibilities.

Lady Bracknell.  Never speak disrespectfully of Society, Algernon.  Only
people who can't get into it do that.  [To Cecily.]  Dear child, of
course you know that Algernon has nothing but his debts to depend upon.
But I do not approve of mercenary marriages.  When I married Lord
Bracknell I had no fortune of any kind.  But I never dreamed for a moment
of allowing that to stand in my way.  Well, I suppose I must give my
consent.

Algernon.  Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  Cecily, you may kiss me!

Cecily.  [Kisses her.]  Thank you, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  You may also address me as Aunt Augusta for the future.

Cecily.  Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  The marriage, I think, had better take place quite soon.

Algernon.  Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

Cecily.  Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  To speak frankly, I am not in favour of long
engagements.  They give people the opportunity of finding out each
other's character before marriage, which I think is never advisable.

Jack.  I beg your pardon for interrupting you, Lady Bracknell, but this
engagement is quite out of the question.  I am Miss Cardew's guardian,
and she cannot marry without my consent until she comes of age.  That
consent I absolutely decline to give.

Lady Bracknell.  Upon what grounds may I ask?  Algernon is an extremely,
I may almost say an ostentatiously, eligible young man.  He has nothing,
but he looks everything.  What more can one desire?

Jack.  It pains me very much to have to speak frankly to you, Lady
Bracknell, about your nephew, but the fact is that I do not approve at
all of his moral character.  I suspect him of being untruthful.  [Algernon
and Cecily look at him in indignant amazement.]

Lady Bracknell.  Untruthful!  My nephew Algernon?  Impossible!  He is an
Oxonian.

Jack.  I fear there can be no possible doubt about the matter.  This
afternoon during my temporary absence in London on an important question
of romance, he obtained admission to my house by means of the false
pretence of being my brother.  Under an assumed name he drank, I've just
been informed by my butler, an entire pint bottle of my Perrier-Jouet,
Brut, '89; wine I was specially reserving for myself.  Continuing his
disgraceful deception, he succeeded in the course of the afternoon in
alienating the affections of my only ward.  He subsequently stayed to
tea, and devoured every single muffin.  And what makes his conduct all
the more heartless is, that he was perfectly well aware from the first
that I have no brother, that I never had a brother, and that I don't
intend to have a brother, not even of any kind.  I distinctly told him so
myself yesterday afternoon.

Lady Bracknell.  Ahem!  Mr. Worthing, after careful consideration I have
decided entirely to overlook my nephew's conduct to you.

Jack.  That is very generous of you, Lady Bracknell.  My own decision,
however, is unalterable.  I decline to give my consent.

Lady Bracknell.  [To Cecily.]  Come here, sweet child.  [Cecily goes
over.]  How old are you, dear?

Cecily.  Well, I am really only eighteen, but I always admit to twenty
when I go to evening parties.

Lady Bracknell.  You are perfectly right in making some slight
alteration.  Indeed, no woman should ever be quite accurate about her
age.  It looks so calculating . . . [In a meditative manner.]  Eighteen,
but admitting to twenty at evening parties.  Well, it will not be very
long before you are of age and free from the restraints of tutelage.  So
I don't think your guardian's consent is, after all, a matter of any
importance.

Jack.  Pray excuse me, Lady Bracknell, for interrupting you again, but it
is only fair to tell you that according to the terms of her grandfather's
will Miss Cardew does not come legally of age till she is thirty-five.

Lady Bracknell.  That does not seem to me to be a grave objection.  Thirty-
five is a very attractive age.  London society is full of women of the
very highest birth who have, of their own free choice, remained thirty-
five for years.  Lady Dumbleton is an instance in point.  To my own
knowledge she has been thirty-five ever since she arrived at the age of
forty, which was many years ago now.  I see no reason why our dear Cecily
should not be even still more attractive at the age you mention than she
is at present.  There will be a large accumulation of property.

Cecily.  Algy, could you wait for me till I was thirty-five?

Algernon.  Of course I could, Cecily.  You know I could.

Cecily.  Yes, I felt it instinctively, but I couldn't wait all that time.
I hate waiting even five minutes for anybody.  It always makes me rather
cross.  I am not punctual myself, I know, but I do like punctuality in
others, and waiting, even to be married, is quite out of the question.

Algernon.  Then what is to be done, Cecily?

Cecily.  I don't know, Mr. Moncrieff.

Lady Bracknell.  My dear Mr. Worthing, as Miss Cardew states positively
that she cannot wait till she is thirty-five--a remark which I am bound
to say seems to me to show a somewhat impatient nature--I would beg of
you to reconsider your decision.

Jack.  But my dear Lady Bracknell, the matter is entirely in your own
hands.  The moment you consent to my marriage with Gwendolen, I will most
gladly allow your nephew to form an alliance with my ward.

Lady Bracknell.  [Rising and drawing herself up.]  You must be quite
aware that what you propose is out of the question.

Jack.  Then a passionate celibacy is all that any of us can look forward
to.

Lady Bracknell.  That is not the destiny I propose for Gwendolen.
Algernon, of course, can choose for himself.  [Pulls out her watch.]
Come, dear, [Gwendolen rises] we have already missed five, if not six,
trains.  To miss any more might expose us to comment on the platform.

[Enter Dr. Chasuble.]

Chasuble.  Everything is quite ready for the christenings.

Lady Bracknell.  The christenings, sir!  Is not that somewhat premature?

Chasuble.  [Looking rather puzzled, and pointing to Jack and Algernon.]
Both these gentlemen have expressed a desire for immediate baptism.

Lady Bracknell.  At their age?  The idea is grotesque and irreligious!
Algernon, I forbid you to be baptized.  I will not hear of such excesses.
Lord Bracknell would be highly displeased if he learned that that was the
way in which you wasted your time and money.

Chasuble.  Am I to understand then that there are to be no christenings
at all this afternoon?

Jack.  I don't think that, as things are now, it would be of much
practical value to either of us, Dr. Chasuble.

Chasuble.  I am grieved to hear such sentiments from you, Mr. Worthing.
They savour of the heretical views of the Anabaptists, views that I have
completely refuted in four of my unpublished sermons.  However, as your
present mood seems to be one peculiarly secular, I will return to the
church at once.  Indeed, I have just been informed by the pew-opener that
for the last hour and a half Miss Prism has been waiting for me in the
vestry.

Lady Bracknell.  [Starting.]  Miss Prism!  Did I hear you mention a Miss
Prism?

Chasuble.  Yes, Lady Bracknell.  I am on my way to join her.

Lady Bracknell.  Pray allow me to detain you for a moment.  This matter
may prove to be one of vital importance to Lord Bracknell and myself.  Is
this Miss Prism a female of repellent aspect, remotely connected with
education?

Chasuble.  [Somewhat indignantly.]  She is the most cultivated of ladies,
and the very picture of respectability.

Lady Bracknell.  It is obviously the same person.  May I ask what
position she holds in your household?

Chasuble.  [Severely.]  I am a celibate, madam.

Jack.  [Interposing.]  Miss Prism, Lady Bracknell, has been for the last
three years Miss Cardew's esteemed governess and valued companion.

Lady Bracknell.  In spite of what I hear of her, I must see her at once.
Let her be sent for.

Chasuble.  [Looking off.]  She approaches; she is nigh.

[Enter Miss Prism hurriedly.]

Miss Prism.  I was told you expected me in the vestry, dear Canon.  I
have been waiting for you there for an hour and three-quarters.  [Catches
sight of Lady Bracknell, who has fixed her with a stony glare.  Miss
Prism grows pale and quails.  She looks anxiously round as if desirous to
escape.]

Lady Bracknell.  [In a severe, judicial voice.]  Prism!  [Miss Prism bows
her head in shame.]  Come here, Prism!  [Miss Prism approaches in a
humble manner.]  Prism!  Where is that baby?  [General consternation.  The
Canon starts back in horror.  Algernon and Jack pretend to be anxious to
shield Cecily and Gwendolen from hearing the details of a terrible public
scandal.]  Twenty-eight years ago, Prism, you left Lord Bracknell's
house, Number 104, Upper Grosvenor Street, in charge of a perambulator
that contained a baby of the male sex.  You never returned.  A few weeks
later, through the elaborate investigations of the Metropolitan police,
the perambulator was discovered at midnight, standing by itself in a
remote corner of Bayswater.  It contained the manuscript of a
three-volume novel of more than usually revolting sentimentality.  [Miss
Prism starts in involuntary indignation.]  But the baby was not there!
[Every one looks at Miss Prism.]  Prism!  Where is that baby?  [A pause.]

Miss Prism.  Lady Bracknell, I admit with shame that I do not know.  I
only wish I did.  The plain facts of the case are these.  On the morning
of the day you mention, a day that is for ever branded on my memory, I
prepared as usual to take the baby out in its perambulator.  I had also
with me a somewhat old, but capacious hand-bag in which I had intended to
place the manuscript of a work of fiction that I had written during my
few unoccupied hours.  In a moment of mental abstraction, for which I
never can forgive myself, I deposited the manuscript in the basinette,
and placed the baby in the hand-bag.

Jack.  [Who has been listening attentively.]  But where did you deposit
the hand-bag?

Miss Prism.  Do not ask me, Mr. Worthing.

Jack.  Miss Prism, this is a matter of no small importance to me.  I
insist on knowing where you deposited the hand-bag that contained that
infant.

Miss Prism.  I left it in the cloak-room of one of the larger railway
stations in London.

Jack.  What railway station?

Miss Prism.  [Quite crushed.]  Victoria.  The Brighton line.  [Sinks into
a chair.]

Jack.  I must retire to my room for a moment.  Gwendolen, wait here for
me.

Gwendolen.  If you are not too long, I will wait here for you all my
life.  [Exit Jack in great excitement.]

Chasuble.  What do you think this means, Lady Bracknell?

Lady Bracknell.  I dare not even suspect, Dr. Chasuble.  I need hardly
tell you that in families of high position strange coincidences are not
supposed to occur.  They are hardly considered the thing.

[Noises heard overhead as if some one was throwing trunks about.  Every
one looks up.]

Cecily.  Uncle Jack seems strangely agitated.

Chasuble.  Your guardian has a very emotional nature.

Lady Bracknell.  This noise is extremely unpleasant.  It sounds as if he
was having an argument.  I dislike arguments of any kind.  They are
always vulgar, and often convincing.

Chasuble.  [Looking up.]  It has stopped now.  [The noise is redoubled.]

Lady Bracknell.  I wish he would arrive at some conclusion.

Gwendolen.  This suspense is terrible.  I hope it will last.  [Enter Jack
with a hand-bag of black leather in his hand.]

Jack.  [Rushing over to Miss Prism.]  Is this the hand-bag, Miss Prism?
Examine it carefully before you speak.  The happiness of more than one
life depends on your answer.

Miss Prism.  [Calmly.]  It seems to be mine.  Yes, here is the injury it
received through the upsetting of a Gower Street omnibus in younger and
happier days.  Here is the stain on the lining caused by the explosion of
a temperance beverage, an incident that occurred at Leamington.  And
here, on the lock, are my initials.  I had forgotten that in an
extravagant mood I had had them placed there.  The bag is undoubtedly
mine.  I am delighted to have it so unexpectedly restored to me.  It has
been a great inconvenience being without it all these years.

Jack.  [In a pathetic voice.]  Miss Prism, more is restored to you than
this hand-bag.  I was the baby you placed in it.

Miss Prism.  [Amazed.]  You?

Jack.  [Embracing her.]  Yes . . . mother!

Miss Prism.  [Recoiling in indignant astonishment.]  Mr. Worthing!  I am
unmarried!

Jack.  Unmarried!  I do not deny that is a serious blow.  But after all,
who has the right to cast a stone against one who has suffered?  Cannot
repentance wipe out an act of folly?  Why should there be one law for
men, and another for women?  Mother, I forgive you.  [Tries to embrace
her again.]

Miss Prism.  [Still more indignant.]  Mr. Worthing, there is some error.
[Pointing to Lady Bracknell.]  There is the lady who can tell you who you
really are.

Jack.  [After a pause.]  Lady Bracknell, I hate to seem inquisitive, but
would you kindly inform me who I am?

Lady Bracknell.  I am afraid that the news I have to give you will not
altogether please you.  You are the son of my poor sister, Mrs.
Moncrieff, and consequently Algernon's elder brother.

Jack.  Algy's elder brother!  Then I have a brother after all.  I knew I
had a brother!  I always said I had a brother!  Cecily,--how could you
have ever doubted that I had a brother?  [Seizes hold of Algernon.]  Dr.
Chasuble, my unfortunate brother.  Miss Prism, my unfortunate brother.
Gwendolen, my unfortunate brother.  Algy, you young scoundrel, you will
have to treat me with more respect in the future.  You have never behaved
to me like a brother in all your life.

Algernon.  Well, not till to-day, old boy, I admit.  I did my best,
however, though I was out of practice.

[Shakes hands.]

Gwendolen.  [To Jack.]  My own!  But what own are you?  What is your
Christian name, now that you have become some one else?

Jack.  Good heavens! . . . I had quite forgotten that point.  Your
decision on the subject of my name is irrevocable, I suppose?

Gwendolen.  I never change, except in my affections.

Cecily.  What a noble nature you have, Gwendolen!

Jack.  Then the question had better be cleared up at once.  Aunt Augusta,
a moment.  At the time when Miss Prism left me in the hand-bag, had I
been christened already?

Lady Bracknell.  Every luxury that money could buy, including
christening, had been lavished on you by your fond and doting parents.

Jack.  Then I was christened!  That is settled.  Now, what name was I
given?  Let me know the worst.

Lady Bracknell.  Being the eldest son you were naturally christened after
your father.

Jack.  [Irritably.]  Yes, but what was my father's Christian name?

Lady Bracknell.  [Meditatively.]  I cannot at the present moment recall
what the General's Christian name was.  But I have no doubt he had one.
He was eccentric, I admit.  But only in later years.  And that was the
result of the Indian climate, and marriage, and indigestion, and other
things of that kind.

Jack.  Algy!  Can't you recollect what our father's Christian name was?

Algernon.  My dear boy, we were never even on speaking terms.  He died
before I was a year old.

Jack.  His name would appear in the Army Lists of the period, I suppose,
Aunt Augusta?

Lady Bracknell.  The General was essentially a man of peace, except in
his domestic life.  But I have no doubt his name would appear in any
military directory.

Jack.  The Army Lists of the last forty years are here.  These delightful
records should have been my constant study.  [Rushes to bookcase and
tears the books out.]  M. Generals . . . Mallam, Maxbohm, Magley, what
ghastly names they have--Markby, Migsby, Mobbs, Moncrieff!  Lieutenant
1840, Captain, Lieutenant-Colonel, Colonel, General 1869, Christian
names, Ernest John.  [Puts book very quietly down and speaks quite
calmly.]  I always told you, Gwendolen, my name was Ernest, didn't I?
Well, it is Ernest after all.  I mean it naturally is Ernest.

Lady Bracknell.  Yes, I remember now that the General was called Ernest,
I knew I had some particular reason for disliking the name.

Gwendolen.  Ernest!  My own Ernest!  I felt from the first that you could
have no other name!

Jack.  Gwendolen, it is a terrible thing for a man to find out suddenly
that all his life he has been speaking nothing but the truth.  Can you
forgive me?

Gwendolen.  I can.  For I feel that you are sure to change.

Jack.  My own one!

Chasuble.  [To Miss Prism.]  Laetitia!  [Embraces her]

Miss Prism.  [Enthusiastically.]  Frederick!  At last!

Algernon.  Cecily!  [Embraces her.]  At last!

Jack.  Gwendolen!  [Embraces her.]  At last!

Lady Bracknell.  My nephew, you seem to be displaying signs of
triviality.

Jack.  On the contrary, Aunt Augusta, I've now realised for the first
time in my life the vital Importance of Being Earnest.

TABLEAU

FIRST ACT


SCENE


_The octagon room at Sir Robert Chiltern’s house in Grosvenor Square_.

[_The room is brilliantly lighted and full of guests_.  _At the top of
the staircase stands_ LADY CHILTERN, _a woman of grave Greek beauty_,
_about twenty-seven years of age_.  _She receives the guests as they come
up_.  _Over the well of the staircase hangs a great chandelier with wax
lights_, _which illumine a large eighteenth-century French
tapestry—representing the Triumph of Love_, _from a design by
Boucher—that is stretched on the staircase wall_.  _On the right is the
entrance to the music-room_.  _The sound of a string quartette is faintly
heard_.  _The entrance on the left leads to other reception-rooms_.  MRS.
MARCHMONT _and_ LADY BASILDON, _two very pretty women_, _are seated
together on a Louis Seize sofa_.  _They are types of exquisite
fragility_.  _Their affectation of manner has a delicate charm_.
_Watteau would have loved to paint them_.]

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Going on to the Hartlocks’ to-night, Margaret?

LADY BASILDON.  I suppose so.  Are you?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Yes.  Horribly tedious parties they give, don’t they?

LADY BASILDON.  Horribly tedious!  Never know why I go.  Never know why I
go anywhere.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  I come here to be educated.

LADY BASILDON.  Ah! I hate being educated!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  So do I.  It puts one almost on a level with the
commercial classes, doesn’t it?  But dear Gertrude Chiltern is always
telling me that I should have some serious purpose in life.  So I come
here to try to find one.

LADY BASILDON.  [_Looking round through her lorgnette_.]  I don’t see
anybody here to-night whom one could possibly call a serious purpose.
The man who took me in to dinner talked to me about his wife the whole
time.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  How very trivial of him!

LADY BASILDON.  Terribly trivial!  What did your man talk about?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  About myself.

LADY BASILDON.  [_Languidly_.]  And were you interested?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Shaking her head_.]  Not in the smallest degree.

LADY BASILDON.  What martyrs we are, dear Margaret!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Rising_.]  And how well it becomes us, Olivia!

[_They rise and go towards the music-room_.  _The_ VICOMTE DE NANJAC, _a
young attaché known for his neckties and his Anglomania_, _approaches
with a low bow_, _and enters into conversation_.]

MASON.  [_Announcing guests from the top of the staircase_.]  Mr. and
Lady Jane Barford.  Lord Caversham.

[_Enter_ LORD CAVERSHAM, _an old gentleman of seventy_, _wearing the
riband and star of the Garter_.  _A fine Whig type_.  _Rather like a
portrait by Lawrence_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Good evening, Lady Chiltern!  Has my good-for-nothing
young son been here?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Smiling_.]  I don’t think Lord Goring has arrived yet.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Coming up to_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]  Why do you call Lord
Goring good-for-nothing?

[MABEL CHILTERN _is a perfect example of the English type of prettiness_,
_the apple-blossom type_.  _She has all the fragrance and freedom of a
flower_.  _There is ripple after ripple of sunlight in her hair_, _and
the little mouth_, _with its parted lips_, _is expectant_, _like the
mouth of a child_.  _She has the fascinating tyranny of youth_, _and the
astonishing courage of innocence_.  _To sane people she is not
reminiscent of any work of art_.  _But she is really like a Tanagra
statuette_, _and would be rather annoyed if she were told so_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Because he leads such an idle life.

MABEL CHILTERN.  How can you say such a thing?  Why, he rides in the Row
at ten o’clock in the morning, goes to the Opera three times a week,
changes his clothes at least five times a day, and dines out every night
of the season.  You don’t call that leading an idle life, do you?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Looking at her with a kindly twinkle in his eyes_.]
You are a very charming young lady!

MABEL CHILTERN.  How sweet of you to say that, Lord Caversham!  Do come
to us more often.  You know we are always at home on Wednesdays, and you
look so well with your star!

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Never go anywhere now.  Sick of London Society.
Shouldn’t mind being introduced to my own tailor; he always votes on the
right side.  But object strongly to being sent down to dinner with my
wife’s milliner.  Never could stand Lady Caversham’s bonnets.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh, I love London Society!  I think it has immensely
improved.  It is entirely composed now of beautiful idiots and brilliant
lunatics.  Just what Society should be.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Hum!  Which is Goring?  Beautiful idiot, or the other
thing?

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Gravely_.]  I have been obliged for the present to put
Lord Goring into a class quite by himself.  But he is developing
charmingly!

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Into what?

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a little curtsey_.]  I hope to let you know very
soon, Lord Caversham!

MASON.  [_Announcing guests_.]  Lady Markby.  Mrs. Cheveley.

[_Enter_ LADY MARKBY _and_ MRS. CHEVELEY.  LADY MARKBY _is a pleasant_,
_kindly_, _popular woman_, _with gray hair à la marquise and good lace_.
MRS. CHEVELEY, _who accompanies her_, _is tall and rather slight_.  _Lips
very thin and highly-coloured_, _a line of scarlet on a pallid face_.
_Venetian red hair_, _aquiline nose_, _and long throat_.  _Rouge
accentuates the natural paleness of her complexion_.  _Gray-green eyes
that move restlessly_.  _She is in heliotrope_, _with diamonds_.  _She
looks rather like an orchid_, _and makes great demands on one’s
curiosity_.  _In all her movements she is extremely graceful_.  _A work
of art_, _on the whole_, _but showing the influence of too many
schools_.]

LADY MARKBY.  Good evening, dear Gertrude!  So kind of you to let me
bring my friend, Mrs. Cheveley.  Two such charming women should know each
other!

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Advances towards_ MRS. CHEVELEY _with a sweet smile_.
_Then suddenly stops_, _and bows rather distantly_.]  I think Mrs.
Cheveley and I have met before.  I did not know she had married a second
time.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Genially_.]  Ah, nowadays people marry as often as they
can, don’t they?  It is most fashionable.  [_To_ DUCHESS OF MARYBOROUGH.]
Dear Duchess, and how is the Duke?  Brain still weak, I suppose?  Well,
that is only to be expected, is it not?  His good father was just the
same.  There is nothing like race, is there?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Playing with her fan_.]  But have we really met before,
Lady Chiltern?  I can’t remember where.  I have been out of England for
so long.

LADY CHILTERN.  We were at school together, Mrs. Cheveley.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Superciliously_.]  Indeed?  I have forgotten all about my
schooldays.  I have a vague impression that they were detestable.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Coldly_.]  I am not surprised!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_In her sweetest manner_.]  Do you know, I am quite
looking forward to meeting your clever husband, Lady Chiltern.  Since he
has been at the Foreign Office, he has been so much talked of in Vienna.
They actually succeed in spelling his name right in the newspapers.  That
in itself is fame, on the continent.

LADY CHILTERN.  I hardly think there will be much in common between you
and my husband, Mrs. Cheveley!  [_Moves away_.]

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  Ah! chère Madame, queue surprise!  I have not seen
you since Berlin!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Not since Berlin, Vicomte.  Five years ago!

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  And you are younger and more beautiful than ever.
How do you manage it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  By making it a rule only to talk to perfectly charming
people like yourself.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  Ah! you flatter me.  You butter me, as they say here.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Do they say that here?  How dreadful of them!

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  Yes, they have a wonderful language.  It should be
more widely known.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _enters_.  _A man of forty_, _but looking somewhat
younger_.  _Clean-shaven_, _with finely-cut features_, _dark-haired and
dark-eyed_.  _A personality of mark_.  _Not popular—few personalities
are_.  _But intensely admired by the few_, _and deeply respected by the
many_.  _The note of his manner is that of perfect distinction_, _with a
slight touch of pride_.  _One feels that he is conscious of the success
he has made in life_.  _A nervous temperament_, _with a tired look_.
_The firmly-chiselled mouth and chin contrast strikingly with the
romantic expression in the deep-set eyes_.  _The variance is suggestive
of an almost complete separation of passion and intellect_, _as though
thought and emotion were each isolated in its own sphere through some
violence of will-power_.  _There is nervousness in the nostrils_, _and in
the pale_, _thin_, _pointed hands_.  _It would be inaccurate to call him
picturesque_.  _Picturesqueness cannot survive the House of Commons_.
_But Vandyck would have liked to have painted his head_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Good evening, Lady Markby!  I hope you have brought
Sir John with you?

LADY MARKBY.  Oh! I have brought a much more charming person than Sir
John.  Sir John’s temper since he has taken seriously to politics has
become quite unbearable.  Really, now that the House of Commons is trying
to become useful, it does a great deal of harm.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I hope not, Lady Markby.  At any rate we do our
best to waste the public time, don’t we?  But who is this charming person
you have been kind enough to bring to us?

LADY MARKBY.  Her name is Mrs. Cheveley!  One of the Dorsetshire
Cheveleys, I suppose.  But I really don’t know.  Families are so mixed
nowadays.  Indeed, as a rule, everybody turns out to be somebody else.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Mrs. Cheveley?  I seem to know the name.

LADY MARKBY.  She has just arrived from Vienna.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Ah! yes.  I think I know whom you mean.

LADY MARKBY.  Oh! she goes everywhere there, and has such pleasant
scandals about all her friends.  I really must go to Vienna next winter.
I hope there is a good chef at the Embassy.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  If there is not, the Ambassador will certainly have
to be recalled.  Pray point out Mrs. Cheveley to me.  I should like to
see her.

LADY MARKBY.  Let me introduce you.  [_To_ MRS. CHEVELEY.]  My dear, Sir
Robert Chiltern is dying to know you!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Bowing_.]  Every one is dying to know the
brilliant Mrs. Cheveley.  Our attachés at Vienna write to us about
nothing else.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thank you, Sir Robert.  An acquaintance that begins with
a compliment is sure to develop into a real friendship.  It starts in the
right manner.  And I find that I know Lady Chiltern already.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Really?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  She has just reminded me that we were at school
together.  I remember it perfectly now.  She always got the good conduct
prize.  I have a distinct recollection of Lady Chiltern always getting
the good conduct prize!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Smiling_.]  And what prizes did you get, Mrs.
Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  My prizes came a little later on in life.  I don’t think
any of them were for good conduct.  I forget!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am sure they were for something charming!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I don’t know that women are always rewarded for being
charming.  I think they are usually punished for it!  Certainly, more
women grow old nowadays through the faithfulness of their admirers than
through anything else!  At least that is the only way I can account for
the terribly haggard look of most of your pretty women in London!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What an appalling philosophy that sounds!  To
attempt to classify you, Mrs. Cheveley, would be an impertinence.  But
may I ask, at heart, are you an optimist or a pessimist?  Those seem to
be the only two fashionable religions left to us nowadays.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, I’m neither.  Optimism begins in a broad grin, and
Pessimism ends with blue spectacles.  Besides, they are both of them
merely poses.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You prefer to be natural?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Sometimes.  But it is such a very difficult pose to keep
up.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What would those modern psychological novelists, of
whom we hear so much, say to such a theory as that?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Ah! the strength of women comes from the fact that
psychology cannot explain us.  Men can be analysed, women . . . merely
adored.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You think science cannot grapple with the problem
of women?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Science can never grapple with the irrational.  That is
why it has no future before it, in this world.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And women represent the irrational.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Well-dressed women do.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a polite bow_.]  I fear I could hardly agree
with you there.  But do sit down.  And now tell me, what makes you leave
your brilliant Vienna for our gloomy London—or perhaps the question is
indiscreet?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Questions are never indiscreet.  Answers sometimes are.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Well, at any rate, may I know if it is politics or
pleasure?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Politics are my only pleasure.  You see nowadays it is
not fashionable to flirt till one is forty, or to be romantic till one is
forty-five, so we poor women who are under thirty, or say we are, have
nothing open to us but politics or philanthropy.  And philanthropy seems
to me to have become simply the refuge of people who wish to annoy their
fellow-creatures.  I prefer politics.  I think they are more . . .
becoming!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  A political life is a noble career!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Sometimes.  And sometimes it is a clever game, Sir
Robert.  And sometimes it is a great nuisance.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Which do you find it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I?  A combination of all three.  [_Drops her fan_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Picks up fan_.]  Allow me!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  But you have not told me yet what makes you honour
London so suddenly.  Our season is almost over.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh! I don’t care about the London season!  It is too
matrimonial.  People are either hunting for husbands, or hiding from
them.  I wanted to meet you.  It is quite true.  You know what a woman’s
curiosity is.  Almost as great as a man’s!  I wanted immensely to meet
you, and . . . to ask you to do something for me.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I hope it is not a little thing, Mrs. Cheveley.  I
find that little things are so very difficult to do.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_After a moment’s reflection_.]  No, I don’t think it is
quite a little thing.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am so glad.  Do tell me what it is.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Later on.  [_Rises_.]  And now may I walk through your
beautiful house?  I hear your pictures are charming.  Poor Baron
Arnheim—you remember the Baron?—used to tell me you had some wonderful
Corots.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With an almost imperceptible start_.]  Did you
know Baron Arnheim well?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Smiling_.]  Intimately.  Did you?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  At one time.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Wonderful man, wasn’t he?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_After a pause_.]  He was very remarkable, in many
ways.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I often think it such a pity he never wrote his memoirs.
They would have been most interesting.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes: he knew men and cities well, like the old
Greek.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Without the dreadful disadvantage of having a Penelope
waiting at home for him.

MASON.  Lord Goring.

[_Enter_ LORD GORING.  _Thirty-four_, _but always says he is younger_.
_A well-bred_, _expressionless face_.  _He is clever_, _but would not
like to be thought so_.  _A flawless dandy_, _he would be annoyed if he
were considered romantic_.  _He plays with life_, _and is on perfectly
good terms with the world_.  _He is fond of being misunderstood_.  _It
gives him a post of vantage_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Good evening, my dear Arthur!  Mrs. Cheveley, allow
me to introduce to you Lord Goring, the idlest man in London.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I have met Lord Goring before.

LORD GORING.  [_Bowing_.]  I did not think you would remember me, Mrs.
Cheveley.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  My memory is under admirable control.  And are you still
a bachelor?

LORD GORING.  I . . . believe so.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  How very romantic!

LORD GORING.  Oh! I am not at all romantic.  I am not old enough.  I
leave romance to my seniors.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Lord Goring is the result of Boodle’s Club, Mrs.
Cheveley.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  He reflects every credit on the institution.

LORD GORING.  May I ask are you staying in London long?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  That depends partly on the weather, partly on the
cooking, and partly on Sir Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You are not going to plunge us into a European war,
I hope?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  There is no danger, at present!

[_She nods to_ LORD GORING, _with a look of amusement in her eyes_, _and
goes out with_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  LORD GORING _saunters over to_ MABEL
CHILTERN.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  You are very late!

LORD GORING.  Have you missed me?

MABEL CHILTERN.  Awfully!

LORD GORING.  Then I am sorry I did not stay away longer.  I like being
missed.

MABEL CHILTERN.  How very selfish of you!

LORD GORING.  I am very selfish.

MABEL CHILTERN.  You are always telling me of your bad qualities, Lord
Goring.

LORD GORING.  I have only told you half of them as yet, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  Are the others very bad?

LORD GORING.  Quite dreadful!  When I think of them at night I go to
sleep at once.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Well, I delight in your bad qualities.  I wouldn’t have
you part with one of them.

LORD GORING.  How very nice of you!  But then you are always nice.  By
the way, I want to ask you a question, Miss Mabel.  Who brought Mrs.
Cheveley here?  That woman in heliotrope, who has just gone out of the
room with your brother?

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh, I think Lady Markby brought her.  Why do you ask?

LORD GORING.  I haven’t seen her for years, that is all.

MABEL CHILTERN.  What an absurd reason!

LORD GORING.  All reasons are absurd.

MABEL CHILTERN.  What sort of a woman is she?

LORD GORING.  Oh! a genius in the daytime and a beauty at night!

MABEL CHILTERN.  I dislike her already.

LORD GORING.  That shows your admirable good taste.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  [_Approaching_.]  Ah, the English young lady is the
dragon of good taste, is she not?  Quite the dragon of good taste.

LORD GORING.  So the newspapers are always telling us.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  I read all your English newspapers.  I find them so
amusing.

LORD GORING.  Then, my dear Nanjac, you must certainly read between the
lines.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  I should like to, but my professor objects.  [_To_
MABEL CHILTERN.]  May I have the pleasure of escorting you to the
music-room, Mademoiselle?

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Looking very disappointed_.]  Delighted, Vicomte,
quite delighted!  [_Turning to_ LORD GORING.]  Aren’t you coming to the
music-room?

LORD GORING.  Not if there is any music going on, Miss Mabel.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Severely_.]  The music is in German.  You would not
understand it.

[_Goes out with the_ VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  LORD CAVERSHAM _comes up to his
son_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir! what are you doing here?  Wasting your life
as usual!  You should be in bed, sir.  You keep too late hours!  I heard
of you the other night at Lady Rufford’s dancing till four o’clock in the
morning!

LORD GORING.  Only a quarter to four, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Can’t make out how you stand London Society.  The thing
has gone to the dogs, a lot of damned nobodies talking about nothing.

LORD GORING.  I love talking about nothing, father.  It is the only thing
I know anything about.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You seem to me to be living entirely for pleasure.

LORD GORING.  What else is there to live for, father?  Nothing ages like
happiness.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You are heartless, sir, very heartless!

LORD GORING.  I hope not, father.  Good evening, Lady Basildon!

LADY BASILDON.  [_Arching two pretty eyebrows_.]  Are you here?  I had no
idea you ever came to political parties!

LORD GORING.  I adore political parties.  They are the only place left to
us where people don’t talk politics.

LADY BASILDON.  I delight in talking politics.  I talk them all day long.
But I can’t bear listening to them.  I don’t know how the unfortunate men
in the House stand these long debates.

LORD GORING.  By never listening.

LADY BASILDON.  Really?

LORD GORING.  [_In his most serious manner_.]  Of course.  You see, it is
a very dangerous thing to listen.  If one listens one may be convinced;
and a man who allows himself to be convinced by an argument is a
thoroughly unreasonable person.

LADY BASILDON.  Ah! that accounts for so much in men that I have never
understood, and so much in women that their husbands never appreciate in
them!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_With a sigh_.]  Our husbands never appreciate anything
in us.  We have to go to others for that!

LADY BASILDON.  [_Emphatically_.]  Yes, always to others, have we not?

LORD GORING.  [_Smiling_.]  And those are the views of the two ladies who
are known to have the most admirable husbands in London.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  That is exactly what we can’t stand.  My Reginald is
quite hopelessly faultless.  He is really unendurably so, at times!
There is not the smallest element of excitement in knowing him.

LORD GORING.  How terrible!  Really, the thing should be more widely
known!

LADY BASILDON.  Basildon is quite as bad; he is as domestic as if he was
a bachelor.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Pressing_ LADY BASILDON’S _hand_.]  My poor Olivia!
We have married perfect husbands, and we are well punished for it.

LORD GORING.  I should have thought it was the husbands who were
punished.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Drawing herself up_.]  Oh, dear no!  They are as happy
as possible!  And as for trusting us, it is tragic how much they trust
us.

LADY BASILDON.  Perfectly tragic!

LORD GORING.  Or comic, Lady Basildon?

LADY BASILDON.  Certainly not comic, Lord Goring.  How unkind of you to
suggest such a thing!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  I am afraid Lord Goring is in the camp of the enemy, as
usual.  I saw him talking to that Mrs. Cheveley when he came in.

LORD GORING.  Handsome woman, Mrs. Cheveley!

LADY BASILDON.  [_Stiffly_.]  Please don’t praise other women in our
presence.  You might wait for us to do that!

LORD GORING.  I did wait.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Well, we are not going to praise her.  I hear she went
to the Opera on Monday night, and told Tommy Rufford at supper that, as
far as she could see, London Society was entirely made up of dowdies and
dandies.

LORD GORING.  She is quite right, too.  The men are all dowdies and the
women are all dandies, aren’t they?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_After a pause_.]  Oh! do you really think that is what
Mrs. Cheveley meant?

LORD GORING.  Of course.  And a very sensible remark for Mrs. Cheveley to
make, too.

[_Enter_ MABEL CHILTERN.  _She joins the group_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Why are you talking about Mrs. Cheveley?  Everybody is
talking about Mrs. Cheveley!  Lord Goring says—what did you say, Lord
Goring, about Mrs. Cheveley?  Oh! I remember, that she was a genius in
the daytime and a beauty at night.

LADY BASILDON.  What a horrid combination!  So very unnatural!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_In her most dreamy manner_.]  I like looking at
geniuses, and listening to beautiful people.

LORD GORING.  Ah! that is morbid of you, Mrs. Marchmont!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Brightening to a look of real pleasure_.]  I am so
glad to hear you say that.  Marchmont and I have been married for seven
years, and he has never once told me that I was morbid.  Men are so
painfully unobservant!

LADY BASILDON.  [_Turning to her_.]  I have always said, dear Margaret,
that you were the most morbid person in London.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Ah! but you are always sympathetic, Olivia!

MABEL CHILTERN.  Is it morbid to have a desire for food?  I have a great
desire for food.  Lord Goring, will you give me some supper?

LORD GORING.  With pleasure, Miss Mabel.  [_Moves away with her_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  How horrid you have been!  You have never talked to me
the whole evening!

LORD GORING.  How could I?  You went away with the child-diplomatist.

MABEL CHILTERN.  You might have followed us.  Pursuit would have been
only polite.  I don’t think I like you at all this evening!

LORD GORING.  I like you immensely.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Well, I wish you’d show it in a more marked way!  [_They
go downstairs_.]

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Olivia, I have a curious feeling of absolute faintness.
I think I should like some supper very much.  I know I should like some
supper.

LADY BASILDON.  I am positively dying for supper, Margaret!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Men are so horribly selfish, they never think of these
things.

LADY BASILDON.  Men are grossly material, grossly material!

[_The_ VICOMTE DE NANJAC _enters from the music-room with some other
guests_.  _After having carefully examined all the people present_, _he
approaches_ LADY BASILDON.]

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  May I have the honour of taking you down to supper,
Comtesse?

LADY BASILDON.  [_Coldly_.]  I never take supper, thank you, Vicomte.
[_The_ VICOMTE _is about to retire_.  LADY BASILDON, _seeing this_,
_rises at once and takes his arm_.]  But I will come down with you with
pleasure.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  I am so fond of eating!  I am very English in all my
tastes.

LADY BASILDON.  You look quite English, Vicomte, quite English.

[_They pass out_.  MR. MONTFORD, _a perfectly groomed young dandy_,
_approaches_ MRS. MARCHMONT.]

MR. MONTFORD.  Like some supper, Mrs. Marchmont?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Languidly_.]  Thank you, Mr. Montford, I never touch
supper.  [_Rises hastily and takes his arm_.]  But I will sit beside you,
and watch you.

MR. MONTFORD.  I don’t know that I like being watched when I am eating!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Then I will watch some one else.

MR. MONTFORD.  I don’t know that I should like that either.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Severely_.]  Pray, Mr. Montford, do not make these
painful scenes of jealousy in public!

[_They go downstairs with the other guests_, _passing_ SIR ROBERT
CHILTERN _and_ MRS. CHEVELEY, _who now enter_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And are you going to any of our country houses
before you leave England, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, no!  I can’t stand your English house-parties.  In
England people actually try to be brilliant at breakfast.  That is so
dreadful of them!  Only dull people are brilliant at breakfast.  And then
the family skeleton is always reading family prayers.  My stay in England
really depends on you, Sir Robert.  [_Sits down on the sofa_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Taking a seat beside her_.]  Seriously?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Quite seriously.  I want to talk to you about a great
political and financial scheme, about this Argentine Canal Company, in
fact.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What a tedious, practical subject for you to talk
about, Mrs. Cheveley!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, I like tedious, practical subjects.  What I don’t
like are tedious, practical people.  There is a wide difference.
Besides, you are interested, I know, in International Canal schemes.  You
were Lord Radley’s secretary, weren’t you, when the Government bought the
Suez Canal shares?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes.  But the Suez Canal was a very great and
splendid undertaking.  It gave us our direct route to India.  It had
imperial value.  It was necessary that we should have control.  This
Argentine scheme is a commonplace Stock Exchange swindle.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  A speculation, Sir Robert!  A brilliant, daring
speculation.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Believe me, Mrs. Cheveley, it is a swindle.  Let us
call things by their proper names.  It makes matters simpler.  We have
all the information about it at the Foreign Office.  In fact, I sent out
a special Commission to inquire into the matter privately, and they
report that the works are hardly begun, and as for the money already
subscribed, no one seems to know what has become of it.  The whole thing
is a second Panama, and with not a quarter of the chance of success that
miserable affair ever had.  I hope you have not invested in it.  I am
sure you are far too clever to have done that.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I have invested very largely in it.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Who could have advised you to do such a foolish
thing?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Your old friend—and mine.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Who?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Baron Arnheim.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Frowning_.]  Ah! yes.  I remember hearing, at the
time of his death, that he had been mixed up in the whole affair.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  It was his last romance.  His last but one, to do him
justice.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rising_.]  But you have not seen my Corots yet.
They are in the music-room.  Corots seem to go with music, don’t they?
May I show them to you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Shaking her head_.]  I am not in a mood to-night for
silver twilights, or rose-pink dawns.  I want to talk business.
[_Motions to him with her fan to sit down again beside her_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I fear I have no advice to give you, Mrs. Cheveley,
except to interest yourself in something less dangerous.  The success of
the Canal depends, of course, on the attitude of England, and I am going
to lay the report of the Commissioners before the House to-morrow night.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  That you must not do.  In your own interests, Sir Robert,
to say nothing of mine, you must not do that.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Looking at her in wonder_.]  In my own interests?
My dear Mrs. Cheveley, what do you mean?  [_Sits down beside her_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Sir Robert, I will be quite frank with you.  I want you
to withdraw the report that you had intended to lay before the House, on
the ground that you have reasons to believe that the Commissioners have
been prejudiced or misinformed, or something.  Then I want you to say a
few words to the effect that the Government is going to reconsider the
question, and that you have reason to believe that the Canal, if
completed, will be of great international value.  You know the sort of
things ministers say in cases of this kind.  A few ordinary platitudes
will do.  In modern life nothing produces such an effect as a good
platitude.  It makes the whole world kin.  Will you do that for me?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Mrs. Cheveley, you cannot be serious in making me
such a proposition!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I am quite serious.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Coldly_.]  Pray allow me to believe that you are
not.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Speaking with great deliberation and emphasis_.]  Ah!
but I am.  And if you do what I ask you, I . . . will pay you very
handsomely!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Pay me!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am afraid I don’t quite understand what you mean.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Leaning back on the sofa and looking at him_.]  How
very disappointing!  And I have come all the way from Vienna in order
that you should thoroughly understand me.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I fear I don’t.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_In her most nonchalant manner_.]  My dear Sir Robert,
you are a man of the world, and you have your price, I suppose.
Everybody has nowadays.  The drawback is that most people are so
dreadfully expensive.  I know I am.  I hope you will be more reasonable
in your terms.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rises indignantly_.]  If you will allow me, I
will call your carriage for you.  You have lived so long abroad, Mrs.
Cheveley, that you seem to be unable to realise that you are talking to
an English gentleman.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Detains him by touching his arm with her fan_, _and
keeping it there while she is talking_.]  I realise that I am talking to
a man who laid the foundation of his fortune by selling to a Stock
Exchange speculator a Cabinet secret.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Biting his lip_.]  What do you mean?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Rising and facing him_.]  I mean that I know the real
origin of your wealth and your career, and I have got your letter, too.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What letter?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Contemptuously_.]  The letter you wrote to Baron
Arnheim, when you were Lord Radley’s secretary, telling the Baron to buy
Suez Canal shares—a letter written three days before the Government
announced its own purchase.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Hoarsely_.]  It is not true.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You thought that letter had been destroyed.  How foolish
of you!  It is in my possession.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  The affair to which you allude was no more than a
speculation.  The House of Commons had not yet passed the bill; it might
have been rejected.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  It was a swindle, Sir Robert.  Let us call things by
their proper names.  It makes everything simpler.  And now I am going to
sell you that letter, and the price I ask for it is your public support
of the Argentine scheme.  You made your own fortune out of one canal.
You must help me and my friends to make our fortunes out of another!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It is infamous, what you propose—infamous!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, no!  This is the game of life as we all have to play
it, Sir Robert, sooner or later!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I cannot do what you ask me.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You mean you cannot help doing it.  You know you are
standing on the edge of a precipice.  And it is not for you to make
terms.  It is for you to accept them.  Supposing you refuse—

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What then?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  My dear Sir Robert, what then?  You are ruined, that is
all!  Remember to what a point your Puritanism in England has brought
you.  In old days nobody pretended to be a bit better than his
neighbours.  In fact, to be a bit better than one’s neighbour was
considered excessively vulgar and middle-class.  Nowadays, with our
modern mania for morality, every one has to pose as a paragon of purity,
incorruptibility, and all the other seven deadly virtues—and what is the
result?  You all go over like ninepins—one after the other.  Not a year
passes in England without somebody disappearing.  Scandals used to lend
charm, or at least interest, to a man—now they crush him.  And yours is a
very nasty scandal. You couldn’t survive it.  If it were known that as a
young man, secretary to a great and important minister, you sold a
Cabinet secret for a large sum of money, and that that was the origin of
your wealth and career, you would be hounded out of public life, you
would disappear completely.  And after all, Sir Robert, why should you
sacrifice your entire future rather than deal diplomatically with your
enemy?  For the moment I am your enemy.  I admit it!  And I am much
stronger than you are.  The big battalions are on my side.  You have a
splendid position, but it is your splendid position that makes you so
vulnerable.  You can’t defend it!  And I am in attack.  Of course I have
not talked morality to you.  You must admit in fairness that I have
spared you that.  Years ago you did a clever, unscrupulous thing; it
turned out a great success.  You owe to it your fortune and position.
And now you have got to pay for it.  Sooner or later we have all to pay
for what we do.  You have to pay now.  Before I leave you to-night, you
have got to promise me to suppress your report, and to speak in the House
in favour of this scheme.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What you ask is impossible.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You must make it possible.  You are going to make it
possible.  Sir Robert, you know what your English newspapers are like.
Suppose that when I leave this house I drive down to some newspaper
office, and give them this scandal and the proofs of it!  Think of their
loathsome joy, of the delight they would have in dragging you down, of
the mud and mire they would plunge you in.  Think of the hypocrite with
his greasy smile penning his leading article, and arranging the foulness
of the public placard.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Stop!  You want me to withdraw the report and to
make a short speech stating that I believe there are possibilities in the
scheme?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Sitting down on the sofa_.]  Those are my terms.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_In a low voice_.]  I will give you any sum of
money you want.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Even you are not rich enough, Sir Robert, to buy back
your past.  No man is.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I will not do what you ask me.  I will not.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You have to.  If you don’t . . . [_Rises from the sofa_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Bewildered and unnerved_.]  Wait a moment!  What
did you propose?  You said that you would give me back my letter, didn’t
you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  That is agreed.  I will be in the Ladies’ Gallery
to-morrow night at half-past eleven.  If by that time—and you will have
had heaps of opportunity—you have made an announcement to the House in
the terms I wish, I shall hand you back your letter with the prettiest
thanks, and the best, or at any rate the most suitable, compliment I can
think of.  I intend to play quite fairly with you.  One should always
play fairly . . . when one has the winning cards.  The Baron taught me
that . . . amongst other things.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You must let me have time to consider your
proposal.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  No; you must settle now!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Give me a week—three days!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Impossible!  I have got to telegraph to Vienna to-night.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My God! what brought you into my life?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Circumstances.  [_Moves towards the door_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Don’t go.  I consent.  The report shall be
withdrawn.  I will arrange for a question to be put to me on the subject.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thank you.  I knew we should come to an amicable
agreement.  I understood your nature from the first.  I analysed you,
though you did not adore me.  And now you can get my carriage for me, Sir
Robert.  I see the people coming up from supper, and Englishmen always
get romantic after a meal, and that bores me dreadfully.  [_Exit_ SIR
ROBERT CHILTERN.]

[_Enter Guests_, LADY CHILTERN, LADY MARKBY, LORD CAVERSHAM, LADY
BASILDON, MRS. MARCHMONT, VICOMTE DE NANJAC, MR. MONTFORD.]

LADY MARKBY.  Well, dear Mrs. Cheveley, I hope you have enjoyed yourself.
Sir Robert is very entertaining, is he not?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Most entertaining!  I have enjoyed my talk with him
immensely.

LADY MARKBY.  He has had a very interesting and brilliant career.  And he
has married a most admirable wife.  Lady Chiltern is a woman of the very
highest principles, I am glad to say.  I am a little too old now, myself,
to trouble about setting a good example, but I always admire people who
do.  And Lady Chiltern has a very ennobling effect on life, though her
dinner-parties are rather dull sometimes.  But one can’t have everything,
can one?  And now I must go, dear.  Shall I call for you to-morrow?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.

LADY MARKBY.  We might drive in the Park at five.  Everything looks so
fresh in the Park now!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Except the people!

LADY MARKBY.  Perhaps the people are a little jaded.  I have often
observed that the Season as it goes on produces a kind of softening of
the brain.  However, I think anything is better than high intellectual
pressure.  That is the most unbecoming thing there is.  It makes the
noses of the young girls so particularly large.  And there is nothing so
difficult to marry as a large nose; men don’t like them.  Good-night,
dear!  [_To_ LADY CHILTERN.]  Good-night, Gertrude!  [_Goes out on_ LORD
CAVERSHAM’S _arm_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  What a charming house you have, Lady Chiltern!  I have
spent a delightful evening.  It has been so interesting getting to know
your husband.

LADY CHILTERN.  Why did you wish to meet my husband, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, I will tell you.  I wanted to interest him in this
Argentine Canal scheme, of which I dare say you have heard.  And I found
him most susceptible,—susceptible to reason, I mean.  A rare thing in a
man.  I converted him in ten minutes.  He is going to make a speech in
the House to-morrow night in favour of the idea.  We must go to the
Ladies’ Gallery and hear him!  It will be a great occasion!

LADY CHILTERN.  There must be some mistake.  That scheme could never have
my husband’s support.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, I assure you it’s all settled.  I don’t regret my
tedious journey from Vienna now.  It has been a great success.  But, of
course, for the next twenty-four hours the whole thing is a dead secret.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Gently_.]  A secret?  Between whom?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a flash of amusement in her eyes_.]  Between your
husband and myself.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Entering_.]  Your carriage is here, Mrs.
Cheveley!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks!  Good evening, Lady Chiltern!  Good-night, Lord
Goring!  I am at Claridge’s.  Don’t you think you might leave a card?

LORD GORING.  If you wish it, Mrs. Cheveley!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, don’t be so solemn about it, or I shall be obliged to
leave a card on you.  In England I suppose that would hardly be
considered en règle.  Abroad, we are more civilised.  Will you see me
down, Sir Robert?  Now that we have both the same interests at heart we
shall be great friends, I hope!

[_Sails out on_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN’S _arm_.  LADY CHILTERN _goes to the
top of the staircase and looks down at them as they descend_.  _Her
expression is troubled_.  _After a little time she is joined by some of
the guests_, _and passes with them into another reception-room_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  What a horrid woman!

LORD GORING.  You should go to bed, Miss Mabel.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Lord Goring!

LORD GORING.  My father told me to go to bed an hour ago.  I don’t see
why I shouldn’t give you the same advice.  I always pass on good advice.
It is the only thing to do with it.  It is never of any use to oneself.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Lord Goring, you are always ordering me out of the room.
I think it most courageous of you.  Especially as I am not going to bed
for hours.  [_Goes over to the sofa_.]  You can come and sit down if you
like, and talk about anything in the world, except the Royal Academy,
Mrs. Cheveley, or novels in Scotch dialect.  They are not improving
subjects.  [_Catches sight of something that is lying on the sofa half
hidden by the cushion_.]  What is this?  Some one has dropped a diamond
brooch!  Quite beautiful, isn’t it?  [_Shows it to him_.]  I wish it was
mine, but Gertrude won’t let me wear anything but pearls, and I am
thoroughly sick of pearls.  They make one look so plain, so good and so
intellectual.  I wonder whom the brooch belongs to.

LORD GORING.  I wonder who dropped it.

MABEL CHILTERN.  It is a beautiful brooch.

LORD GORING.  It is a handsome bracelet.

MABEL CHILTERN.  It isn’t a bracelet.  It’s a brooch.

LORD GORING.  It can be used as a bracelet.  [_Takes it from her_, _and_,
_pulling out a green letter-case_, _puts the ornament carefully in it_,
_and replaces the whole thing in his breast-pocket with the most perfect
sang froid_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  What are you doing?

LORD GORING.  Miss Mabel, I am going to make a rather strange request to
you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Eagerly_.]  Oh, pray do!  I have been waiting for it
all the evening.

LORD GORING.  [_Is a little taken aback_, _but recovers himself_.]  Don’t
mention to anybody that I have taken charge of this brooch.  Should any
one write and claim it, let me know at once.

MABEL CHILTERN.  That is a strange request.

LORD GORING.  Well, you see I gave this brooch to somebody once, years
ago.

MABEL CHILTERN.  You did?

LORD GORING.  Yes.

[LADY CHILTERN _enters alone_.  _The other guests have gone_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Then I shall certainly bid you good-night.  Good-night,
Gertrude!  [_Exit_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Good-night, dear!  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  You saw whom Lady
Markby brought here to-night?

LORD GORING.  Yes.  It was an unpleasant surprise.  What did she come
here for?

LADY CHILTERN.  Apparently to try and lure Robert to uphold some
fraudulent scheme in which she is interested.  The Argentine Canal, in
fact.

LORD GORING.  She has mistaken her man, hasn’t she?

LADY CHILTERN.  She is incapable of understanding an upright nature like
my husband’s!

LORD GORING.  Yes.  I should fancy she came to grief if she tried to get
Robert into her toils.  It is extraordinary what astounding mistakes
clever women make.

LADY CHILTERN.  I don’t call women of that kind clever.  I call them
stupid!

LORD GORING.  Same thing often.  Good-night, Lady Chiltern!

LADY CHILTERN.  Good-night!

[_Enter_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My dear Arthur, you are not going?  Do stop a
little!

LORD GORING.  Afraid I can’t, thanks.  I have promised to look in at the
Hartlocks’.  I believe they have got a mauve Hungarian band that plays
mauve Hungarian music.  See you soon.  Good-bye!

[_Exit_]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  How beautiful you look to-night, Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert, it is not true, is it?  You are not going to lend
your support to this Argentine speculation?  You couldn’t!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Starting_.]  Who told you I intended to do so?

LADY CHILTERN.  That woman who has just gone out, Mrs. Cheveley, as she
calls herself now.  She seemed to taunt me with it.  Robert, I know this
woman.  You don’t.  We were at school together.  She was untruthful,
dishonest, an evil influence on every one whose trust or friendship she
could win.  I hated, I despised her.  She stole things, she was a thief.
She was sent away for being a thief.  Why do you let her influence you?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude, what you tell me may be true, but it
happened many years ago.  It is best forgotten!  Mrs. Cheveley may have
changed since then.  No one should be entirely judged by their past.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Sadly_.]  One’s past is what one is.  It is the only
way by which people should be judged.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  That is a hard saying, Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  It is a true saying, Robert.  And what did she mean by
boasting that she had got you to lend your support, your name, to a thing
I have heard you describe as the most dishonest and fraudulent scheme
there has ever been in political life?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Biting his lip_.]  I was mistaken in the view I
took.  We all may make mistakes.

LADY CHILTERN.  But you told me yesterday that you had received the
report from the Commission, and that it entirely condemned the whole
thing.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Walking up and down_.]  I have reasons now to
believe that the Commission was prejudiced, or, at any rate, misinformed.
Besides, Gertrude, public and private life are different things.  They
have different laws, and move on different lines.

LADY CHILTERN.  They should both represent man at his highest.  I see no
difference between them.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Stopping_.]  In the present case, on a matter of
practical politics, I have changed my mind.  That is all.

LADY CHILTERN.  All!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Sternly_.]  Yes!

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert!  Oh! it is horrible that I should have to ask you
such a question—Robert, are you telling me the whole truth?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Why do you ask me such a question?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_After a pause_.]  Why do you not answer it?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Sitting down_.]  Gertrude, truth is a very
complex thing, and politics is a very complex business.  There are wheels
within wheels.  One may be under certain obligations to people that one
must pay.  Sooner or later in political life one has to compromise.
Every one does.

LADY CHILTERN.  Compromise?  Robert, why do you talk so differently
to-night from the way I have always heard you talk?  Why are you changed?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am not changed.  But circumstances alter things.

LADY CHILTERN.  Circumstances should never alter principles!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  But if I told you—

LADY CHILTERN.  What?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  That it was necessary, vitally necessary?

LADY CHILTERN.  It can never be necessary to do what is not honourable.
Or if it be necessary, then what is it that I have loved!  But it is not,
Robert; tell me it is not.  Why should it be?  What gain would you get?
Money?  We have no need of that!  And money that comes from a tainted
source is a degradation.  Power?  But power is nothing in itself.  It is
power to do good that is fine—that, and that only.  What is it, then?
Robert, tell me why you are going to do this dishonourable thing!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude, you have no right to use that word.  I
told you it was a question of rational compromise.  It is no more than
that.

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert, that is all very well for other men, for men who
treat life simply as a sordid speculation; but not for you, Robert, not
for you.  You are different.  All your life you have stood apart from
others.  You have never let the world soil you.  To the world, as to
myself, you have been an ideal always.  Oh! be that ideal still.  That
great inheritance throw not away—that tower of ivory do not destroy.
Robert, men can love what is beneath them—things unworthy, stained,
dishonoured.  We women worship when we love; and when we lose our
worship, we lose everything.  Oh! don’t kill my love for you, don’t kill
that!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  I know that there are men with horrible secrets in their
lives—men who have done some shameful thing, and who in some critical
moment have to pay for it, by doing some other act of shame—oh! don’t
tell me you are such as they are!  Robert, is there in your life any
secret dishonour or disgrace?  Tell me, tell me at once, that—

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  That what?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Speaking very slowly_.]  That our lives may drift
apart.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Drift apart?

LADY CHILTERN.  That they may be entirely separate.  It would be better
for us both.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude, there is nothing in my past life that you
might not know.

LADY CHILTERN.  I was sure of it, Robert, I was sure of it.  But why did
you say those dreadful things, things so unlike your real self?  Don’t
let us ever talk about the subject again.  You will write, won’t you, to
Mrs. Cheveley, and tell her that you cannot support this scandalous
scheme of hers?  If you have given her any promise you must take it back,
that is all!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Must I write and tell her that?

LADY CHILTERN.  Surely, Robert!  What else is there to do?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I might see her personally.  It would be better.

LADY CHILTERN.  You must never see her again, Robert.  She is not a woman
you should ever speak to.  She is not worthy to talk to a man like you.
No; you must write to her at once, now, this moment, and let your letter
show her that your decision is quite irrevocable!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Write this moment!

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  But it is so late.  It is close on twelve.

LADY CHILTERN.  That makes no matter.  She must know at once that she has
been mistaken in you—and that you are not a man to do anything base or
underhand or dishonourable.  Write here, Robert.  Write that you decline
to support this scheme of hers, as you hold it to be a dishonest scheme.
Yes—write the word dishonest.  She knows what that word means.  [SIR
ROBERT CHILTERN _sits down and writes a letter_.  _His wife takes it up
and reads it_.]  Yes; that will do.  [_Rings bell_.]  And now the
envelope.  [_He writes the envelope slowly_.  _Enter_ MASON.]  Have this
letter sent at once to Claridge’s Hotel.  There is no answer.  [_Exit_
MASON.  LADY CHILTERN _kneels down beside her husband_, _and puts her
arms around him_.]  Robert, love gives one an instinct to things.  I feel
to-night that I have saved you from something that might have been a
danger to you, from something that might have made men honour you less
than they do.  I don’t think you realise sufficiently, Robert, that you
have brought into the political life of our time a nobler atmosphere, a
finer attitude towards life, a freer air of purer aims and higher
ideals—I know it, and for that I love you, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh, love me always, Gertrude, love me always!

LADY CHILTERN.  I will love you always, because you will always be worthy
of love.  We needs must love the highest when we see it!  [_Kisses him
and rises and goes out_.]

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _walks up and down for a moment_; _then sits down
and buries his face in his hands_.  _The Servant enters and begins
pulling out the lights_.  SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _looks up_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Put out the lights, Mason, put out the lights!

[_The Servant puts out the lights_.  _The room becomes almost dark_.
_The only light there is comes from the great chandelier that hangs over
the staircase and illumines the tapestry of the Triumph of Love_.]

                                 ACT DROP




SECOND ACT


SCENE


_Morning-room at Sir Robert Chiltern’s house_.

[LORD GORING, _dressed in the height of fashion_, _is lounging in an
armchair_.  SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _is standing in front of the fireplace_.
_He is evidently in a state of great mental excitement and distress_.
_As the scene progresses he paces nervously up and down the room_.]

LORD GORING.  My dear Robert, it’s a very awkward business, very awkward
indeed.  You should have told your wife the whole thing.  Secrets from
other people’s wives are a necessary luxury in modern life.  So, at
least, I am always told at the club by people who are bald enough to know
better.  But no man should have a secret from his own wife.  She
invariably finds it out.  Women have a wonderful instinct about things.
They can discover everything except the obvious.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur, I couldn’t tell my wife.  When could I have
told her?  Not last night.  It would have made a life-long separation
between us, and I would have lost the love of the one woman in the world
I worship, of the only woman who has ever stirred love within me.  Last
night it would have been quite impossible.  She would have turned from me
in horror . . . in horror and in contempt.

LORD GORING.  Is Lady Chiltern as perfect as all that?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes; my wife is as perfect as all that.

LORD GORING.  [_Taking off his left-hand glove_.]  What a pity!  I beg
your pardon, my dear fellow, I didn’t quite mean that.  But if what you
tell me is true, I should like to have a serious talk about life with
Lady Chiltern.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It would be quite useless.

LORD GORING.  May I try?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes; but nothing could make her alter her views.

LORD GORING.  Well, at the worst it would simply be a psychological
experiment.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  All such experiments are terribly dangerous.

LORD GORING.  Everything is dangerous, my dear fellow.  If it wasn’t so,
life wouldn’t be worth living. . . . Well, I am bound to say that I think
you should have told her years ago.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  When?  When we were engaged?  Do you think she
would have married me if she had known that the origin of my fortune is
such as it is, the basis of my career such as it is, and that I had done
a thing that I suppose most men would call shameful and dishonourable?

LORD GORING.  [_Slowly_.]  Yes; most men would call it ugly names.  There
is no doubt of that.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Bitterly_.]  Men who every day do something of
the same kind themselves.  Men who, each one of them, have worse secrets
in their own lives.

LORD GORING.  That is the reason they are so pleased to find out other
people’s secrets.  It distracts public attention from their own.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And, after all, whom did I wrong by what I did?  No
one.

LORD GORING.  [_Looking at him steadily_.]  Except yourself, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_After a pause_.]  Of course I had private
information about a certain transaction contemplated by the Government of
the day, and I acted on it.  Private information is practically the
source of every large modern fortune.

LORD GORING.  [_Tapping his boot with his cane_.]  And public scandal
invariably the result.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Pacing up and down the room_.]  Arthur, do you
think that what I did nearly eighteen years ago should be brought up
against me now?  Do you think it fair that a man’s whole career should be
ruined for a fault done in one’s boyhood almost?  I was twenty-two at the
time, and I had the double misfortune of being well-born and poor, two
unforgiveable things nowadays.  Is it fair that the folly, the sin of
one’s youth, if men choose to call it a sin, should wreck a life like
mine, should place me in the pillory, should shatter all that I have
worked for, all that I have built up.  Is it fair, Arthur?

LORD GORING.  Life is never fair, Robert.  And perhaps it is a good thing
for most of us that it is not.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Every man of ambition has to fight his century with
its own weapons.  What this century worships is wealth.  The God of this
century is wealth.  To succeed one must have wealth.  At all costs one
must have wealth.

LORD GORING.  You underrate yourself, Robert.  Believe me, without wealth
you could have succeeded just as well.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  When I was old, perhaps.  When I had lost my
passion for power, or could not use it.  When I was tired, worn out,
disappointed.  I wanted my success when I was young.  Youth is the time
for success.  I couldn’t wait.

LORD GORING.  Well, you certainly have had your success while you are
still young.  No one in our day has had such a brilliant success.
Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs at the age of forty—that’s good
enough for any one, I should think.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And if it is all taken away from me now?  If I lose
everything over a horrible scandal?  If I am hounded from public life?

LORD GORING.  Robert, how could you have sold yourself for money?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Excitedly_.]  I did not sell myself for money.  I
bought success at a great price.  That is all.

LORD GORING.  [_Gravely_.]  Yes; you certainly paid a great price for it.
But what first made you think of doing such a thing?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Baron Arnheim.

LORD GORING.  Damned scoundrel!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  No; he was a man of a most subtle and refined
intellect.  A man of culture, charm, and distinction.  One of the most
intellectual men I ever met.

LORD GORING.  Ah! I prefer a gentlemanly fool any day.  There is more to
be said for stupidity than people imagine.  Personally I have a great
admiration for stupidity.  It is a sort of fellow-feeling, I suppose.
But how did he do it?  Tell me the whole thing.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Throws himself into an armchair by the
writing-table_.]  One night after dinner at Lord Radley’s the Baron began
talking about success in modern life as something that one could reduce
to an absolutely definite science.  With that wonderfully fascinating
quiet voice of his he expounded to us the most terrible of all
philosophies, the philosophy of power, preached to us the most marvellous
of all gospels, the gospel of gold.  I think he saw the effect he had
produced on me, for some days afterwards he wrote and asked me to come
and see him.  He was living then in Park Lane, in the house Lord Woolcomb
has now.  I remember so well how, with a strange smile on his pale,
curved lips, he led me through his wonderful picture gallery, showed me
his tapestries, his enamels, his jewels, his carved ivories, made me
wonder at the strange loveliness of the luxury in which he lived; and
then told me that luxury was nothing but a background, a painted scene in
a play, and that power, power over other men, power over the world, was
the one thing worth having, the one supreme pleasure worth knowing, the
one joy one never tired of, and that in our century only the rich
possessed it.

LORD GORING.  [_With great deliberation_.]  A thoroughly shallow creed.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rising_.]  I didn’t think so then.  I don’t think
so now.  Wealth has given me enormous power.  It gave me at the very
outset of my life freedom, and freedom is everything.  You have never
been poor, and never known what ambition is.  You cannot understand what
a wonderful chance the Baron gave me.  Such a chance as few men get.

LORD GORING.  Fortunately for them, if one is to judge by results.  But
tell me definitely, how did the Baron finally persuade you to—well, to do
what you did?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  When I was going away he said to me that if I ever
could give him any private information of real value he would make me a
very rich man.  I was dazed at the prospect he held out to me, and my
ambition and my desire for power were at that time boundless.  Six weeks
later certain private documents passed through my hands.

LORD GORING.  [_Keeping his eyes steadily fixed on the carpet_.]  State
documents?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes.  [LORD GORING _sighs_, _then passes his hand
across his forehead and looks up_.]

LORD GORING.  I had no idea that you, of all men in the world, could have
been so weak, Robert, as to yield to such a temptation as Baron Arnheim
held out to you.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Weak?  Oh, I am sick of hearing that phrase.  Sick
of using it about others.  Weak?  Do you really think, Arthur, that it is
weakness that yields to temptation?  I tell you that there are terrible
temptations that it requires strength, strength and courage, to yield to.
To stake all one’s life on a single moment, to risk everything on one
throw, whether the stake be power or pleasure, I care not—there is no
weakness in that.  There is a horrible, a terrible courage.  I had that
courage.  I sat down the same afternoon and wrote Baron Arnheim the
letter this woman now holds.  He made three-quarters of a million over
the transaction.

LORD GORING.  And you?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I received from the Baron £110,000.

LORD GORING.  You were worth more, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  No; that money gave me exactly what I wanted, power
over others.  I went into the House immediately.  The Baron advised me in
finance from time to time.  Before five years I had almost trebled my
fortune.  Since then everything that I have touched has turned out a
success.  In all things connected with money I have had a luck so
extraordinary that sometimes it has made me almost afraid.  I remember
having read somewhere, in some strange book, that when the gods wish to
punish us they answer our prayers.

LORD GORING.  But tell me, Robert, did you never suffer any regret for
what you had done?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  No.  I felt that I had fought the century with its
own weapons, and won.

LORD GORING.  [_Sadly_.]  You thought you had won.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I thought so.  [_After a long pause_.]  Arthur, do
you despise me for what I have told you?

LORD GORING.  [_With deep feeling in his voice_.]  I am very sorry for
you, Robert, very sorry indeed.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I don’t say that I suffered any remorse.  I didn’t.
Not remorse in the ordinary, rather silly sense of the word.  But I have
paid conscience money many times.  I had a wild hope that I might disarm
destiny.  The sum Baron Arnheim gave me I have distributed twice over in
public charities since then.

LORD GORING.  [_Looking up_.]  In public charities?  Dear me! what a lot
of harm you must have done, Robert!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh, don’t say that, Arthur; don’t talk like that!

LORD GORING.  Never mind what I say, Robert!  I am always saying what I
shouldn’t say.  In fact, I usually say what I really think.  A great
mistake nowadays.  It makes one so liable to be misunderstood.  As
regards this dreadful business, I will help you in whatever way I can.
Of course you know that.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Thank you, Arthur, thank you.  But what is to be
done?  What can be done?

LORD GORING.  [_Leaning back with his hands in his pockets_.]  Well, the
English can’t stand a man who is always saying he is in the right, but
they are very fond of a man who admits that he has been in the wrong.  It
is one of the best things in them.  However, in your case, Robert, a
confession would not do.  The money, if you will allow me to say so, is
. . . awkward.  Besides, if you did make a clean breast of the whole
affair, you would never be able to talk morality again.  And in England a
man who can’t talk morality twice a week to a large, popular, immoral
audience is quite over as a serious politician.  There would be nothing
left for him as a profession except Botany or the Church.  A confession
would be of no use.  It would ruin you.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It would ruin me.  Arthur, the only thing for me to
do now is to fight the thing out.

LORD GORING.  [_Rising from his chair_.]  I was waiting for you to say
that, Robert.  It is the only thing to do now.  And you must begin by
telling your wife the whole story.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  That I will not do.

LORD GORING.  Robert, believe me, you are wrong.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I couldn’t do it.  It would kill her love for me.
And now about this woman, this Mrs. Cheveley.  How can I defend myself
against her?  You knew her before, Arthur, apparently.

LORD GORING.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Did you know her well?

LORD GORING.  [_Arranging his necktie_.]  So little that I got engaged to
be married to her once, when I was staying at the Tenbys’.  The affair
lasted for three days . . . nearly.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Why was it broken off?

LORD GORING.  [_Airily_.]  Oh, I forget.  At least, it makes no matter.
By the way, have you tried her with money?  She used to be confoundedly
fond of money.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I offered her any sum she wanted.  She refused.

LORD GORING.  Then the marvellous gospel of gold breaks down sometimes.
The rich can’t do everything, after all.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Not everything.  I suppose you are right.  Arthur,
I feel that public disgrace is in store for me.  I feel certain of it.  I
never knew what terror was before.  I know it now.  It is as if a hand of
ice were laid upon one’s heart.  It is as if one’s heart were beating
itself to death in some empty hollow.

LORD GORING.  [_Striking the table_.]  Robert, you must fight her.  You
must fight her.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  But how?

LORD GORING.  I can’t tell you how at present.  I have not the smallest
idea.  But every one has some weak point.  There is some flaw in each one
of us.  [_Strolls to the fireplace and looks at himself in the glass_.]
My father tells me that even I have faults.  Perhaps I have.  I don’t
know.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  In defending myself against Mrs. Cheveley, I have a
right to use any weapon I can find, have I not?

LORD GORING.  [_Still looking in the glass_.]  In your place I don’t
think I should have the smallest scruple in doing so.  She is thoroughly
well able to take care of herself.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Sits down at the table and takes a pen in his
hand_.]  Well, I shall send a cipher telegram to the Embassy at Vienna,
to inquire if there is anything known against her.  There may be some
secret scandal she might be afraid of.

LORD GORING.  [_Settling his buttonhole_.]  Oh, I should fancy Mrs.
Cheveley is one of those very modern women of our time who find a new
scandal as becoming as a new bonnet, and air them both in the Park every
afternoon at five-thirty.  I am sure she adores scandals, and that the
sorrow of her life at present is that she can’t manage to have enough of
them.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Writing_.]  Why do you say that?

LORD GORING.  [_Turning round_.]  Well, she wore far too much rouge last
night, and not quite enough clothes.  That is always a sign of despair in
a woman.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Striking a bell_.]  But it is worth while my
wiring to Vienna, is it not?

LORD GORING.  It is always worth while asking a question, though it is
not always worth while answering one.

[_Enter_ MASON.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Is Mr. Trafford in his room?

MASON.  Yes, Sir Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Puts what he has written into an envelope_,
_which he then carefully closes_.]  Tell him to have this sent off in
cipher at once.  There must not be a moment’s delay.

MASON.  Yes, Sir Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh! just give that back to me again.

[_Writes something on the envelope_.  MASON _then goes out with the
letter_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  She must have had some curious hold over Baron
Arnheim.  I wonder what it was.

LORD GORING.  [_Smiling_.]  I wonder.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I will fight her to the death, as long as my wife
knows nothing.

LORD GORING.  [_Strongly_.]  Oh, fight in any case—in any case.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a gesture of despair_.]  If my wife found
out, there would be little left to fight for.  Well, as soon as I hear
from Vienna, I shall let you know the result.  It is a chance, just a
chance, but I believe in it.  And as I fought the age with its own
weapons, I will fight her with her weapons.  It is only fair, and she
looks like a woman with a past, doesn’t she?

LORD GORING.  Most pretty women do.  But there is a fashion in pasts just
as there is a fashion in frocks.  Perhaps Mrs. Cheveley’s past is merely
a slightly décolleté one, and they are excessively popular nowadays.
Besides, my dear Robert, I should not build too high hopes on frightening
Mrs. Cheveley.  I should not fancy Mrs. Cheveley is a woman who would be
easily frightened.  She has survived all her creditors, and she shows
wonderful presence of mind.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh! I live on hopes now.  I clutch at every chance.
I feel like a man on a ship that is sinking.  The water is round my feet,
and the very air is bitter with storm.  Hush! I hear my wife’s voice.

[_Enter_ LADY CHILTERN _in walking dress_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Good afternoon, Lord Goring!

LORD GORING.  Good afternoon, Lady Chiltern!  Have you been in the Park?

LADY CHILTERN.  No; I have just come from the Woman’s Liberal
Association, where, by the way, Robert, your name was received with loud
applause, and now I have come in to have my tea.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]
You will wait and have some tea, won’t you?

LORD GORING.  I’ll wait for a short time, thanks.

LADY CHILTERN.  I will be back in a moment.  I am only going to take my
hat off.

LORD GORING.  [_In his most earnest manner_.]  Oh! please don’t.  It is
so pretty.  One of the prettiest hats I ever saw.  I hope the Woman’s
Liberal Association received it with loud applause.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_With a smile_.]  We have much more important work to do
than look at each other’s bonnets, Lord Goring.

LORD GORING.  Really?  What sort of work?

LADY CHILTERN.  Oh! dull, useful, delightful things, Factory Acts, Female
Inspectors, the Eight Hours’ Bill, the Parliamentary Franchise. . . .
Everything, in fact, that you would find thoroughly uninteresting.

LORD GORING.  And never bonnets?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_With mock indignation_.]  Never bonnets, never!

[LADY CHILTERN _goes out through the door leading to her boudoir_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Takes_ LORD GORING’S _hand_.]  You have been a
good friend to me, Arthur, a thoroughly good friend.

LORD GORING.  I don’t know that I have been able to do much for you,
Robert, as yet.  In fact, I have not been able to do anything for you, as
far as I can see.  I am thoroughly disappointed with myself.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You have enabled me to tell you the truth.  That is
something.  The truth has always stifled me.

LORD GORING.  Ah! the truth is a thing I get rid of as soon as possible!
Bad habit, by the way.  Makes one very unpopular at the club . . . with
the older members.  They call it being conceited.  Perhaps it is.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I would to God that I had been able to tell the
truth . . . to live the truth.  Ah! that is the great thing in life, to
live the truth.  [_Sighs_, _and goes towards the door_.]  I’ll see you
soon again, Arthur, shan’t I?

LORD GORING.  Certainly.  Whenever you like.  I’m going to look in at the
Bachelors’ Ball to-night, unless I find something better to do.  But I’ll
come round to-morrow morning.  If you should want me to-night by any
chance, send round a note to Curzon Street.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Thank you.

[_As he reaches the door_, LADY CHILTERN _enters from her boudoir_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  You are not going, Robert?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I have some letters to write, dear.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Going to him_.]  You work too hard, Robert.  You seem
never to think of yourself, and you are looking so tired.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It is nothing, dear, nothing.

[_He kisses her and goes out_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  Do sit down.  I am so glad you have
called.  I want to talk to you about . . . well, not about bonnets, or
the Woman’s Liberal Association.  You take far too much interest in the
first subject, and not nearly enough in the second.

LORD GORING.  You want to talk to me about Mrs. Cheveley?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.  You have guessed it.  After you left last night I
found out that what she had said was really true.  Of course I made
Robert write her a letter at once, withdrawing his promise.

LORD GORING.  So he gave me to understand.

LADY CHILTERN.  To have kept it would have been the first stain on a
career that has been stainless always.  Robert must be above reproach.
He is not like other men.  He cannot afford to do what other men do.
[_She looks at_ LORD GORING, _who remains silent_.]  Don’t you agree with
me?  You are Robert’s greatest friend.  You are our greatest friend, Lord
Goring.  No one, except myself, knows Robert better than you do.  He has
no secrets from me, and I don’t think he has any from you.

LORD GORING.  He certainly has no secrets from me.  At least I don’t
think so.

LADY CHILTERN.  Then am I not right in my estimate of him?  I know I am
right.  But speak to me frankly.

LORD GORING.  [_Looking straight at her_.]  Quite frankly?

LADY CHILTERN.  Surely.  You have nothing to conceal, have you?

LORD GORING.  Nothing.  But, my dear Lady Chiltern, I think, if you will
allow me to say so, that in practical life—

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Smiling_.]  Of which you know so little, Lord Goring—

LORD GORING.  Of which I know nothing by experience, though I know
something by observation.  I think that in practical life there is
something about success, actual success, that is a little unscrupulous,
something about ambition that is unscrupulous always.  Once a man has set
his heart and soul on getting to a certain point, if he has to climb the
crag, he climbs the crag; if he has to walk in the mire—

LADY CHILTERN.  Well?

LORD GORING.  He walks in the mire.  Of course I am only talking
generally about life.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Gravely_.]  I hope so.  Why do you look at me so
strangely, Lord Goring?

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern, I have sometimes thought that . . . perhaps
you are a little hard in some of your views on life.  I think that . . .
often you don’t make sufficient allowances.  In every nature there are
elements of weakness, or worse than weakness.  Supposing, for instance,
that—that any public man, my father, or Lord Merton, or Robert, say, had,
years ago, written some foolish letter to some one . . .

LADY CHILTERN.  What do you mean by a foolish letter?

LORD GORING.  A letter gravely compromising one’s position.  I am only
putting an imaginary case.

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert is as incapable of doing a foolish thing as he is
of doing a wrong thing.

LORD GORING.  [_After a long pause_.]  Nobody is incapable of doing a
foolish thing.  Nobody is incapable of doing a wrong thing.

LADY CHILTERN.  Are you a Pessimist?  What will the other dandies say?
They will all have to go into mourning.

LORD GORING.  [_Rising_.]  No, Lady Chiltern, I am not a Pessimist.
Indeed I am not sure that I quite know what Pessimism really means.  All
I do know is that life cannot be understood without much charity, cannot
be lived without much charity.  It is love, and not German philosophy,
that is the true explanation of this world, whatever may be the
explanation of the next.  And if you are ever in trouble, Lady Chiltern,
trust me absolutely, and I will help you in every way I can.  If you ever
want me, come to me for my assistance, and you shall have it.  Come at
once to me.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Looking at him in surprise_.]  Lord Goring, you are
talking quite seriously.  I don’t think I ever heard you talk seriously
before.

LORD GORING.  [_Laughing_.]  You must excuse me, Lady Chiltern.  It won’t
occur again, if I can help it.

LADY CHILTERN.  But I like you to be serious.

[_Enter_ MABEL CHILTERN, _in the most ravishing frock_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Dear Gertrude, don’t say such a dreadful thing to Lord
Goring.  Seriousness would be very unbecoming to him.  Good afternoon
Lord Goring!  Pray be as trivial as you can.

LORD GORING.  I should like to, Miss Mabel, but I am afraid I am . . . a
little out of practice this morning; and besides, I have to be going now.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Just when I have come in!  What dreadful manners you
have!  I am sure you were very badly brought up.

LORD GORING.  I was.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I wish I had brought you up!

LORD GORING.  I am so sorry you didn’t.

MABEL CHILTERN.  It is too late now, I suppose?

LORD GORING.  [_Smiling_.]  I am not so sure.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Will you ride to-morrow morning?

LORD GORING.  Yes, at ten.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Don’t forget.

LORD GORING.  Of course I shan’t.  By the way, Lady Chiltern, there is no
list of your guests in _The Morning Post_ of to-day.  It has apparently
been crowded out by the County Council, or the Lambeth Conference, or
something equally boring.  Could you let me have a list?  I have a
particular reason for asking you.

LADY CHILTERN.  I am sure Mr. Trafford will be able to give you one.

LORD GORING.  Thanks, so much.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Tommy is the most useful person in London.

LORD GORING [_Turning to her_.]  And who is the most ornamental?

MABEL CHILTERN [_Triumphantly_.]  I am.

LORD GORING.  How clever of you to guess it!  [_Takes up his hat and
cane_.]  Good-bye, Lady Chiltern!  You will remember what I said to you,
won’t you?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes; but I don’t know why you said it to me.

LORD GORING.  I hardly know myself.  Good-bye, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN [_With a little moue of disappointment_.]  I wish you were
not going.  I have had four wonderful adventures this morning; four and a
half, in fact.  You might stop and listen to some of them.

LORD GORING.  How very selfish of you to have four and a half!  There
won’t be any left for me.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I don’t want you to have any.  They would not be good
for you.

LORD GORING.  That is the first unkind thing you have ever said to me.
How charmingly you said it!  Ten to-morrow.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Sharp.

LORD GORING.  Quite sharp.  But don’t bring Mr. Trafford.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a little toss of the head_.]  Of course I shan’t
bring Tommy Trafford.  Tommy Trafford is in great disgrace.

LORD GORING.  I am delighted to hear it.  [_Bows and goes out_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Gertrude, I wish you would speak to Tommy Trafford.

LADY CHILTERN.  What has poor Mr. Trafford done this time?  Robert says
he is the best secretary he has ever had.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Well, Tommy has proposed to me again.  Tommy really does
nothing but propose to me.  He proposed to me last night in the
music-room, when I was quite unprotected, as there was an elaborate trio
going on.  I didn’t dare to make the smallest repartee, I need hardly
tell you.  If I had, it would have stopped the music at once.  Musical
people are so absurdly unreasonable.  They always want one to be
perfectly dumb at the very moment when one is longing to be absolutely
deaf.  Then he proposed to me in broad daylight this morning, in front of
that dreadful statue of Achilles.  Really, the things that go on in front
of that work of art are quite appalling.  The police should interfere.
At luncheon I saw by the glare in his eye that he was going to propose
again, and I just managed to check him in time by assuring him that I was
a bimetallist.  Fortunately I don’t know what bimetallism means.  And I
don’t believe anybody else does either.  But the observation crushed
Tommy for ten minutes.  He looked quite shocked.  And then Tommy is so
annoying in the way he proposes.  If he proposed at the top of his voice,
I should not mind so much.  That might produce some effect on the public.
But he does it in a horrid confidential way.  When Tommy wants to be
romantic he talks to one just like a doctor.  I am very fond of Tommy,
but his methods of proposing are quite out of date.  I wish, Gertrude,
you would speak to him, and tell him that once a week is quite often
enough to propose to any one, and that it should always be done in a
manner that attracts some attention.

LADY CHILTERN.  Dear Mabel, don’t talk like that.  Besides, Robert thinks
very highly of Mr. Trafford.  He believes he has a brilliant future
before him.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! I wouldn’t marry a man with a future before him for
anything under the sun.

LADY CHILTERN.  Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  I know, dear.  You married a man with a future, didn’t
you?  But then Robert was a genius, and you have a noble,
self-sacrificing character.  You can stand geniuses.  I have no character
at all, and Robert is the only genius I could ever bear.  As a rule, I
think they are quite impossible.  Geniuses talk so much, don’t they?
Such a bad habit!  And they are always thinking about themselves, when I
want them to be thinking about me.  I must go round now and rehearse at
Lady Basildon’s.  You remember, we are having tableaux, don’t you?  The
Triumph of something, I don’t know what!  I hope it will be triumph of
me.  Only triumph I am really interested in at present.  [_Kisses_ LADY
CHILTERN _and goes out_; _then comes running back_.]  Oh, Gertrude, do
you know who is coming to see you?  That dreadful Mrs. Cheveley, in a
most lovely gown.  Did you ask her?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Rising_.]  Mrs. Cheveley!  Coming to see me?
Impossible!

MABEL CHILTERN.  I assure you she is coming upstairs, as large as life
and not nearly so natural.

LADY CHILTERN.  You need not wait, Mabel.  Remember, Lady Basildon is
expecting you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! I must shake hands with Lady Markby.  She is
delightful.  I love being scolded by her.

[_Enter_ MASON.]

MASON.  Lady Markby.  Mrs. Cheveley.

[_Enter_ LADY MARKBY _and_ MRS. CHEVELEY.]

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Advancing to meet them_.]  Dear Lady Markby, how nice
of you to come and see me!  [_Shakes hands with her_, _and bows somewhat
distantly to_ MRS. CHEVELEY.]  Won’t you sit down, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.  Isn’t that Miss Chiltern?  I should like so much
to know her.

LADY CHILTERN.  Mabel, Mrs. Cheveley wishes to know you.

[MABEL CHILTERN _gives a little nod_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Sitting down_.]  I thought your frock so charming last
night, Miss Chiltern.  So simple and . . . suitable.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Really?  I must tell my dressmaker.  It will be such a
surprise to her.  Good-bye, Lady Markby!

LADY MARKBY.  Going already?

MABEL CHILTERN.  I am so sorry but I am obliged to.  I am just off to
rehearsal.  I have got to stand on my head in some tableaux.

LADY MARKBY.  On your head, child?  Oh! I hope not.  I believe it is most
unhealthy.  [_Takes a seat on the sofa next_ LADY CHILTERN.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  But it is for an excellent charity: in aid of the
Undeserving, the only people I am really interested in.  I am the
secretary, and Tommy Trafford is treasurer.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  And what is Lord Goring?

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! Lord Goring is president.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  The post should suit him admirably, unless he has
deteriorated since I knew him first.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Reflecting_.]  You are remarkably modern, Mabel.  A
little too modern, perhaps.  Nothing is so dangerous as being too modern.
One is apt to grow old-fashioned quite suddenly.  I have known many
instances of it.

MABEL CHILTERN.  What a dreadful prospect!

LADY MARKBY.  Ah! my dear, you need not be nervous.  You will always be
as pretty as possible.  That is the best fashion there is, and the only
fashion that England succeeds in setting.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a curtsey_.]  Thank you so much, Lady Markby, for
England . . . and myself.  [_Goes out_.]

LADY MARKBY.  [_Turning to_ LADY CHILTERN.]  Dear Gertrude, we just
called to know if Mrs. Cheveley’s diamond brooch has been found.

LADY CHILTERN.  Here?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  I missed it when I got back to Claridge’s, and I
thought I might possibly have dropped it here.

LADY CHILTERN.  I have heard nothing about it.  But I will send for the
butler and ask.  [_Touches the bell_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, pray don’t trouble, Lady Chiltern.  I dare say I lost
it at the Opera, before we came on here.

LADY MARKBY.  Ah yes, I suppose it must have been at the Opera.  The fact
is, we all scramble and jostle so much nowadays that I wonder we have
anything at all left on us at the end of an evening.  I know myself that,
when I am coming back from the Drawing Room, I always feel as if I hadn’t
a shred on me, except a small shred of decent reputation, just enough to
prevent the lower classes making painful observations through the windows
of the carriage.  The fact is that our Society is terribly
over-populated.  Really, some one should arrange a proper scheme of
assisted emigration.  It would do a great deal of good.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I quite agree with you, Lady Markby.  It is nearly six
years since I have been in London for the Season, and I must say Society
has become dreadfully mixed.  One sees the oddest people everywhere.

LADY MARKBY.  That is quite true, dear.  But one needn’t know them.  I’m
sure I don’t know half the people who come to my house.  Indeed, from all
I hear, I shouldn’t like to.

[_Enter_ MASON.]

LADY CHILTERN.  What sort of a brooch was it that you lost, Mrs.
Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  A diamond snake-brooch with a ruby, a rather large ruby.

LADY MARKBY.  I thought you said there was a sapphire on the head, dear?

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Smiling_.]  No, lady Markby—a ruby.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Nodding her head_.]  And very becoming, I am quite sure.

LADY CHILTERN.  Has a ruby and diamond brooch been found in any of the
rooms this morning, Mason?

MASON.  No, my lady.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  It really is of no consequence, Lady Chiltern.  I am so
sorry to have put you to any inconvenience.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Coldly_.]  Oh, it has been no inconvenience.  That will
do, Mason.  You can bring tea.

[_Exit_ MASON.]

LADY MARKBY.  Well, I must say it is most annoying to lose anything.  I
remember once at Bath, years ago, losing in the Pump Room an exceedingly
handsome cameo bracelet that Sir John had given me.  I don’t think he has
ever given me anything since, I am sorry to say.  He has sadly
degenerated.  Really, this horrid House of Commons quite ruins our
husbands for us.  I think the Lower House by far the greatest blow to a
happy married life that there has been since that terrible thing called
the Higher Education of Women was invented.

LADY CHILTERN.  Ah! it is heresy to say that in this house, Lady Markby.
Robert is a great champion of the Higher Education of Women, and so, I am
afraid, am I.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  The higher education of men is what I should like to see.
Men need it so sadly.

LADY MARKBY.  They do, dear.  But I am afraid such a scheme would be
quite unpractical.  I don’t think man has much capacity for development.
He has got as far as he can, and that is not far, is it?  With regard to
women, well, dear Gertrude, you belong to the younger generation, and I
am sure it is all right if you approve of it.  In my time, of course, we
were taught not to understand anything.  That was the old system, and
wonderfully interesting it was.  I assure you that the amount of things I
and my poor dear sister were taught not to understand was quite
extraordinary.  But modern women understand everything, I am told.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Except their husbands.  That is the one thing the modern
woman never understands.

LADY MARKBY.  And a very good thing too, dear, I dare say.  It might
break up many a happy home if they did.  Not yours, I need hardly say,
Gertrude.  You have married a pattern husband.  I wish I could say as
much for myself.  But since Sir John has taken to attending the debates
regularly, which he never used to do in the good old days, his language
has become quite impossible.  He always seems to think that he is
addressing the House, and consequently whenever he discusses the state of
the agricultural labourer, or the Welsh Church, or something quite
improper of that kind, I am obliged to send all the servants out of the
room.  It is not pleasant to see one’s own butler, who has been with one
for twenty-three years, actually blushing at the side-board, and the
footmen making contortions in corners like persons in circuses.  I assure
you my life will be quite ruined unless they send John at once to the
Upper House.  He won’t take any interest in politics then, will he?  The
House of Lords is so sensible.  An assembly of gentlemen.  But in his
present state, Sir John is really a great trial.  Why, this morning
before breakfast was half over, he stood up on the hearthrug, put his
hands in his pockets, and appealed to the country at the top of his
voice.  I left the table as soon as I had my second cup of tea, I need
hardly say.  But his violent language could be heard all over the house!
I trust, Gertrude, that Sir Robert is not like that?

LADY CHILTERN.  But I am very much interested in politics, Lady Markby.
I love to hear Robert talk about them.

LADY MARKBY.  Well, I hope he is not as devoted to Blue Books as Sir John
is.  I don’t think they can be quite improving reading for any one.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Languidly_.]  I have never read a Blue Book.  I prefer
books . . . in yellow covers.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Genially unconscious_.]  Yellow is a gayer colour, is it
not?  I used to wear yellow a good deal in my early days, and would do so
now if Sir John was not so painfully personal in his observations, and a
man on the question of dress is always ridiculous, is he not?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, no!  I think men are the only authorities on dress.

LADY MARKBY.  Really?  One wouldn’t say so from the sort of hats they
wear? would one?

[_The butler enters_, _followed by the footman_.  _Tea is set on a small
table close to_ LADY CHILTERN.]

LADY CHILTERN.  May I give you some tea, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.  [_The butler hands_ MRS. CHEVELEY _a cup of tea
on a salver_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Some tea, Lady Markby?

LADY MARKBY.  No thanks, dear.  [_The servants go out_.]  The fact is, I
have promised to go round for ten minutes to see poor Lady Brancaster,
who is in very great trouble.  Her daughter, quite a well-brought-up
girl, too, has actually become engaged to be married to a curate in
Shropshire.  It is very sad, very sad indeed.  I can’t understand this
modern mania for curates.  In my time we girls saw them, of course,
running about the place like rabbits.  But we never took any notice of
them, I need hardly say.  But I am told that nowadays country society is
quite honeycombed with them.  I think it most irreligious.  And then the
eldest son has quarrelled with his father, and it is said that when they
meet at the club Lord Brancaster always hides himself behind the money
article in _The Times_.  However, I believe that is quite a common
occurrence nowadays and that they have to take in extra copies of _The
Times_ at all the clubs in St. James’s Street; there are so many sons who
won’t have anything to do with their fathers, and so many fathers who
won’t speak to their sons.  I think myself, it is very much to be
regretted.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  So do I.  Fathers have so much to learn from their sons
nowadays.

LADY MARKBY.  Really, dear?  What?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  The art of living.  The only really Fine Art we have
produced in modern times.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Shaking her head_.]  Ah!  I am afraid Lord Brancaster
knew a good deal about that.  More than his poor wife ever did.
[_Turning to_ LADY CHILTERN.]  You know Lady Brancaster, don’t you, dear?

LADY CHILTERN.  Just slightly.  She was staying at Langton last autumn,
when we were there.

LADY MARKBY.  Well, like all stout women, she looks the very picture of
happiness, as no doubt you noticed.  But there are many tragedies in her
family, besides this affair of the curate.  Her own sister, Mrs. Jekyll,
had a most unhappy life; through no fault of her own, I am sorry to say.
She ultimately was so broken-hearted that she went into a convent, or on
to the operatic stage, I forget which.  No; I think it was decorative
art-needlework she took up.  I know she had lost all sense of pleasure in
life.  [_Rising_.]  And now, Gertrude, if you will allow me, I shall
leave Mrs. Cheveley in your charge and call back for her in a quarter of
an hour.  Or perhaps, dear Mrs. Cheveley, you wouldn’t mind waiting in
the carriage while I am with Lady Brancaster.  As I intend it to be a
visit of condolence, I shan’t stay long.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Rising_.]  I don’t mind waiting in the carriage at all,
provided there is somebody to look at one.

LADY MARKBY.  Well, I hear the curate is always prowling about the house.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I am afraid I am not fond of girl friends.

LADY CHILTERN [_Rising_.]  Oh, I hope Mrs. Cheveley will stay here a
little.  I should like to have a few minutes’ conversation with her.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  How very kind of you, Lady Chiltern!  Believe me, nothing
would give me greater pleasure.

LADY MARKBY.  Ah! no doubt you both have many pleasant reminiscences of
your schooldays to talk over together.  Good-bye, dear Gertrude!  Shall I
see you at Lady Bonar’s to-night?  She has discovered a wonderful new
genius.  He does . . . nothing at all, I believe.  That is a great
comfort, is it not?

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert and I are dining at home by ourselves to-night,
and I don’t think I shall go anywhere afterwards.  Robert, of course,
will have to be in the House.  But there is nothing interesting on.

LADY MARKBY.  Dining at home by yourselves?  Is that quite prudent?  Ah,
I forgot, your husband is an exception.  Mine is the general rule, and
nothing ages a woman so rapidly as having married the general rule.
[_Exit_ LADY MARKBY.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Wonderful woman, Lady Markby, isn’t she?  Talks more and
says less than anybody I ever met.  She is made to be a public speaker.
Much more so than her husband, though he is a typical Englishman, always
dull and usually violent.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Makes no answer_, _but remains standing_.  _There is a
pause_.  _Then the eyes of the two women meet_.  LADY CHILTERN _looks
stern and pale_.  MRS. CHEVELEY _seem rather amused_.]  Mrs. Cheveley, I
think it is right to tell you quite frankly that, had I known who you
really were, I should not have invited you to my house last night.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_With an impertinent smile_.]  Really?

LADY CHILTERN.  I could not have done so.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I see that after all these years you have not changed a
bit, Gertrude.

LADY CHILTERN.  I never change.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Elevating her eyebrows_.]  Then life has taught you
nothing?

LADY CHILTERN.  It has taught me that a person who has once been guilty
of a dishonest and dishonourable action may be guilty of it a second
time, and should be shunned.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Would you apply that rule to every one?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes, to every one, without exception.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Then I am sorry for you, Gertrude, very sorry for you.

LADY CHILTERN.  You see now, I was sure, that for many reasons any
further acquaintance between us during your stay in London is quite
impossible?

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Leaning back in her chair_.]  Do you know, Gertrude, I
don’t mind your talking morality a bit.  Morality is simply the attitude
we adopt towards people whom we personally dislike.  You dislike me.  I
am quite aware of that.  And I have always detested you.  And yet I have
come here to do you a service.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Contemptuously_.]  Like the service you wished to
render my husband last night, I suppose.  Thank heaven, I saved him from
that.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Starting to her feet_.]  It was you who made him write
that insolent letter to me?  It was you who made him break his promise?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Then you must make him keep it.  I give you till
to-morrow morning—no more.  If by that time your husband does not
solemnly bind himself to help me in this great scheme in which I am
interested—

LADY CHILTERN.  This fraudulent speculation—

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Call it what you choose.  I hold your husband in the
hollow of my hand, and if you are wise you will make him do what I tell
him.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Rising and going towards her_.]  You are impertinent.
What has my husband to do with you?  With a woman like you?

MRS. CHEVELEY [_With a bitter laugh_.]  In this world like meets with
like.  It is because your husband is himself fraudulent and dishonest
that we pair so well together.  Between you and him there are chasms.  He
and I are closer than friends.  We are enemies linked together.  The same
sin binds us.

LADY CHILTERN.  How dare you class my husband with yourself?  How dare
you threaten him or me?  Leave my house.  You are unfit to enter it.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _enters from behind_.  _He hears his wife’s last
words_, _and sees to whom they are addressed_.  _He grows deadly pale_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Your house!  A house bought with the price of dishonour.
A house, everything in which has been paid for by fraud.  [_Turns round
and sees_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]  Ask him what the origin of his fortune
is!  Get him to tell you how he sold to a stockbroker a Cabinet secret.
Learn from him to what you owe your position.

LADY CHILTERN.  It is not true!  Robert!  It is not true!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Pointing at him with outstretched finger_.]  Look at
him!  Can he deny it?  Does he dare to?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Go!  Go at once.  You have done your worst now.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  My worst?  I have not yet finished with you, with either
of you.  I give you both till to-morrow at noon.  If by then you don’t do
what I bid you to do, the whole world shall know the origin of Robert
Chiltern.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _strikes the bell_.  _Enter_ MASON.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Show Mrs. Cheveley out.

[MRS. CHEVELEY _starts_; _then bows with somewhat exaggerated politeness
to_ LADY CHILTERN, _who makes no sign of response_.  _As she passes by_
SIR ROBERT CHILTERN, _who is standing close to the door_, _she pauses for
a moment and looks him straight in the face_.  _She then goes out_,
_followed by the servant_, _who closes the door after him_.  _The husband
and wife are left alone_.  LADY CHILTERN _stands like some one in a
dreadful dream_.  _Then she turns round and looks at her husband_.  _She
looks at him with strange eyes_, _as though she were seeing him for the
first time_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  You sold a Cabinet secret for money!  You began your life
with fraud!  You built up your career on dishonour!  Oh, tell me it is
not true!  Lie to me!  Lie to me!  Tell me it is not true!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What this woman said is quite true.  But, Gertrude,
listen to me.  You don’t realise how I was tempted.  Let me tell you the
whole thing. [_Goes towards her_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Don’t come near me.  Don’t touch me.  I feel as if you
had soiled me for ever.  Oh! what a mask you have been wearing all these
years!  A horrible painted mask!  You sold yourself for money.  Oh! a
common thief were better.  You put yourself up to sale to the highest
bidder!  You were bought in the market.  You lied to the whole world.
And yet you will not lie to me.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rushing towards her_.]  Gertrude!  Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Thrusting him back with outstretched hands_.]  No,
don’t speak!  Say nothing!  Your voice wakes terrible memories—memories
of things that made me love you—memories of words that made me love
you—memories that now are horrible to me.  And how I worshipped you!  You
were to me something apart from common life, a thing pure, noble, honest,
without stain.  The world seemed to me finer because you were in it, and
goodness more real because you lived.  And now—oh, when I think that I
made of a man like you my ideal! the ideal of my life!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  There was your mistake.  There was your error.  The
error all women commit.  Why can’t you women love us, faults and all?
Why do you place us on monstrous pedestals?  We have all feet of clay,
women as well as men; but when we men love women, we love them knowing
their weaknesses, their follies, their imperfections, love them all the
more, it may be, for that reason.  It is not the perfect, but the
imperfect, who have need of love.  It is when we are wounded by our own
hands, or by the hands of others, that love should come to cure us—else
what use is love at all?  All sins, except a sin against itself, Love
should forgive.  All lives, save loveless lives, true Love should pardon.
A man’s love is like that.  It is wider, larger, more human than a
woman’s.  Women think that they are making ideals of men.  What they are
making of us are false idols merely.  You made your false idol of me, and
I had not the courage to come down, show you my wounds, tell you my
weaknesses.  I was afraid that I might lose your love, as I have lost it
now.  And so, last night you ruined my life for me—yes, ruined it!  What
this woman asked of me was nothing compared to what she offered to me.
She offered security, peace, stability.  The sin of my youth, that I had
thought was buried, rose up in front of me, hideous, horrible, with its
hands at my throat.  I could have killed it for ever, sent it back into
its tomb, destroyed its record, burned the one witness against me.  You
prevented me.  No one but you, you know it.  And now what is there before
me but public disgrace, ruin, terrible shame, the mockery of the world, a
lonely dishonoured life, a lonely dishonoured death, it may be, some day?
Let women make no more ideals of men! let them not put them on alters and
bow before them, or they may ruin other lives as completely as you—you
whom I have so wildly loved—have ruined mine!

[_He passes from the room_.  LADY CHILTERN _rushes towards him_, _but the
door is closed when she reaches it_.  _Pale with anguish_, _bewildered_,
_helpless_, _she sways like a plant in the water_.  _Her hands_,
_outstretched_, _seem to tremble in the air like blossoms in the mind_.
_Then she flings herself down beside a sofa and buries her face_.  _Her
sobs are like the sobs of a child_.]

                                 ACT DROP




THIRD ACT


SCENE


_The Library in Lord Goring’s house_.  _An Adam room_.  _On the right is
the door leading into the hall_.  _On the left_, _the door of the
smoking-room_.  _A pair of folding doors at the back open into the
drawing-room_.  _The fire is lit_.  _Phipps_, _the butler_, _is arranging
some newspapers on the writing-table_.  _The distinction of Phipps is his
impassivity_. _He has been termed by enthusiasts the Ideal Butler_.  _The
Sphinx is not so incommunicable_.  _He is a mask with a manner_.  _Of his
intellectual or emotional life_, _history knows nothing_.  _He represents
the dominance of form_.

[_Enter_ LORD GORING _in evening dress with a buttonhole_.  _He is
wearing a silk hat and Inverness cape_.  _White-gloved_, _he carries a
Louis Seize cane_.  _His are all the delicate fopperies of Fashion_.
_One sees that he stands in immediate relation to modern life_, _makes it
indeed_, _and so masters it_.  _He is the first well-dressed philosopher
in the history of thought_.]

LORD GORING.  Got my second buttonhole for me, Phipps?

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.  [_Takes his hat_, _cane_, _and cape_, _and
presents new buttonhole on salver_.]

LORD GORING.  Rather distinguished thing, Phipps.  I am the only person
of the smallest importance in London at present who wears a buttonhole.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.  I have observed that,

LORD GORING.  [_Taking out old buttonhole_.]  You see, Phipps, Fashion is
what one wears oneself.  What is unfashionable is what other people wear.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Just as vulgarity is simply the conduct of other people.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  [_Putting in a new buttonhole_.]  And falsehoods the truths
of other people.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Other people are quite dreadful.  The only possible society
is oneself.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  To love oneself is the beginning of a lifelong romance,
Phipps.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  [_Looking at himself in the glass_.]  Don’t think I quite
like this buttonhole, Phipps.  Makes me look a little too old.  Makes me
almost in the prime of life, eh, Phipps?

PHIPPS.  I don’t observe any alteration in your lordship’s appearance.

LORD GORING.  You don’t, Phipps?

PHIPPS.  No, my lord.

LORD GORING.  I am not quite sure.  For the future a more trivial
buttonhole, Phipps, on Thursday evenings.

PHIPPS.  I will speak to the florist, my lord.  She has had a loss in her
family lately, which perhaps accounts for the lack of triviality your
lordship complains of in the buttonhole.

LORD GORING.  Extraordinary thing about the lower classes in England—they
are always losing their relations.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord!  They are extremely fortunate in that respect.

LORD GORING.  [_Turns round and looks at him_.  PHIPPS _remains
impassive_.]  Hum!  Any letters, Phipps?

PHIPPS.  Three, my lord.  [_Hands letters on a salver_.]

LORD GORING.  [_Takes letters_.]  Want my cab round in twenty minutes.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.  [_Goes towards door_.]

LORD GORING.  [_Holds up letter in pink envelope_.]  Ahem!  Phipps, when
did this letter arrive?

PHIPPS.  It was brought by hand just after your lordship went to the
club.

LORD GORING.  That will do.  [_Exit_ PHIPPS.]  Lady Chiltern’s
handwriting on Lady Chiltern’s pink notepaper.  That is rather curious.
I thought Robert was to write.  Wonder what Lady Chiltern has got to say
to me?  [_Sits at bureau and opens letter_, _and reads it_.]  ‘I want
you.  I trust you.  I am coming to you.  Gertrude.’  [_Puts down the
letter with a puzzled look_.  _Then takes it up_, _and reads it again
slowly_.]  ‘I want you.  I trust you.  I am coming to you.’  So she has
found out everything!  Poor woman!  Poor woman!  [ _Pulls out watch and
looks at it_.]  But what an hour to call!  Ten o’clock!  I shall have to
give up going to the Berkshires.  However, it is always nice to be
expected, and not to arrive.  I am not expected at the Bachelors’, so I
shall certainly go there.  Well, I will make her stand by her husband.
That is the only thing for her to do.  That is the only thing for any
woman to do.  It is the growth of the moral sense in women that makes
marriage such a hopeless, one-sided institution.  Ten o’clock.  She
should be here soon.  I must tell Phipps I am not in to any one else.
[_Goes towards bell_]

[_Enter_ PHIPPS.]

PHIPPS.  Lord Caversham.

LORD GORING.  Oh, why will parents always appear at the wrong time?  Some
extraordinary mistake in nature, I suppose.  [_Enter_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]
Delighted to see you, my dear father.  [_Goes to meet him_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Take my cloak off.

LORD GORING.  Is it worth while, father?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Of course it is worth while, sir.  Which is the most
comfortable chair?

LORD GORING.  This one, father.  It is the chair I use myself, when I
have visitors.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Thank ye.  No draught, I hope, in this room?

LORD GORING.  No, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Sitting down_.]  Glad to hear it.  Can’t stand
draughts.  No draughts at home.

LORD GORING.  Good many breezes, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Eh?  Eh?  Don’t understand what you mean.  Want to have
a serious conversation with you, sir.

LORD GORING.  My dear father!  At this hour?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir, it is only ten o’clock.  What is your
objection to the hour?  I think the hour is an admirable hour!

LORD GORING.  Well, the fact is, father, this is not my day for talking
seriously.  I am very sorry, but it is not my day.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What do you mean, sir?

LORD GORING.  During the Season, father, I only talk seriously on the
first Tuesday in every month, from four to seven.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, make it Tuesday, sir, make it Tuesday.

LORD GORING.  But it is after seven, father, and my doctor says I must
not have any serious conversation after seven.  It makes me talk in my
sleep.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Talk in your sleep, sir?  What does that matter?  You
are not married.

LORD GORING.  No, father, I am not married.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Hum!  That is what I have come to talk to you about,
sir.  You have got to get married, and at once.  Why, when I was your
age, sir, I had been an inconsolable widower for three months, and was
already paying my addresses to your admirable mother.  Damme, sir, it is
your duty to get married.  You can’t be always living for pleasure.
Every man of position is married nowadays.  Bachelors are not fashionable
any more.  They are a damaged lot.  Too much is known about them.  You
must get a wife, sir.  Look where your friend Robert Chiltern has got to
by probity, hard work, and a sensible marriage with a good woman.  Why
don’t you imitate him, sir?  Why don’t you take him for your model?

LORD GORING.  I think I shall, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I wish you would, sir.  Then I should be happy.  At
present I make your mother’s life miserable on your account.  You are
heartless, sir, quite heartless.

LORD GORING.  I hope not, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  And it is high time for you to get married.  You are
thirty-four years of age, sir.

LORD GORING.  Yes, father, but I only admit to thirty-two—thirty-one and
a half when I have a really good buttonhole.  This buttonhole is not . . .
trivial enough.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I tell you you are thirty-four, sir.  And there is a
draught in your room, besides, which makes your conduct worse.  Why did
you tell me there was no draught, sir?  I feel a draught, sir, I feel it
distinctly.

LORD GORING.  So do I, father.  It is a dreadful draught.  I will come
and see you to-morrow, father.  We can talk over anything you like.  Let
me help you on with your cloak, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  No, sir; I have called this evening for a definite
purpose, and I am going to see it through at all costs to my health or
yours.  Put down my cloak, sir.

LORD GORING.  Certainly, father.  But let us go into another room.
[_Rings bell_.]  There is a dreadful draught here.  [_Enter_ PHIPPS.]
Phipps, is there a good fire in the smoking-room?

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Come in there, father.  Your sneezes are quite
heartrending.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir, I suppose I have a right to sneeze when I
choose?

LORD GORING.  [_Apologetically_.]  Quite so, father.  I was merely
expressing sympathy.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Oh, damn sympathy.  There is a great deal too much of
that sort of thing going on nowadays.

LORD GORING.  I quite agree with you, father.  If there was less sympathy
in the world there would be less trouble in the world.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Going towards the smoking-room_.]  That is a paradox,
sir.  I hate paradoxes.

LORD GORING.  So do I, father.  Everybody one meets is a paradox
nowadays.  It is a great bore.  It makes society so obvious.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Turning round_, _and looking at his son beneath his
bushy eyebrows_.]  Do you always really understand what you say, sir?

LORD GORING.  [_After some hesitation_.]  Yes, father, if I listen
attentively.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Indignantly_.]  If you listen attentively! . . .
Conceited young puppy!

[_Goes off grumbling into the smoking-room_.  PHIPPS _enters_.]

LORD GORING.  Phipps, there is a lady coming to see me this evening on
particular business.  Show her into the drawing-room when she arrives.
You understand?

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  It is a matter of the gravest importance, Phipps.

PHIPPS.  I understand, my lord.

LORD GORING.  No one else is to be admitted, under any circumstances.

PHIPPS.  I understand, my lord.  [_Bell rings_.]

LORD GORING.  Ah! that is probably the lady.  I shall see her myself.

[_Just as he is going towards the door_ LORD CAVERSHAM _enters from the
smoking-room_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir? am I to wait attendance on you?

LORD GORING.  [_Considerably perplexed_.]  In a moment, father.  Do
excuse me.  [LORD CAVERSHAM _goes back_.]  Well, remember my
instructions, Phipps—into that room.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

[LORD GORING _goes into the smoking-room_.  HAROLD, _the footman shows_
MRS. CHEVELEY _in_.  _Lamia-like_, _she is in green and silver_.  _She
has a cloak of black satin_, _lined with dead rose-leaf silk_.]

HAROLD.  What name, madam?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_To_ PHIPPS, _who advances towards her_.]  Is Lord
Goring not here?  I was told he was at home?

PHIPPS.  His lordship is engaged at present with Lord Caversham, madam.

[_Turns a cold_, _glassy eye on_ HAROLD, _who at once retires_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_To herself_.]  How very filial!

PHIPPS.  His lordship told me to ask you, madam, to be kind enough to
wait in the drawing-room for him.  His lordship will come to you there.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a look of surprise_.]  Lord Goring expects me?

PHIPPS.  Yes, madam.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Are you quite sure?

PHIPPS.  His lordship told me that if a lady called I was to ask her to
wait in the drawing-room.  [_Goes to the door of the drawing-room and
opens it_.]  His lordship’s directions on the subject were very precise.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_To herself_]  How thoughtful of him!  To expect the
unexpected shows a thoroughly modern intellect.  [_Goes towards the
drawing-room and looks in_.]  Ugh!  How dreary a bachelor’s drawing-room
always looks.  I shall have to alter all this.  [PHIPPS _brings the lamp
from the writing-table_.]  No, I don’t care for that lamp.  It is far too
glaring.  Light some candles.

PHIPPS.  [_Replaces lamp_.]  Certainly, madam.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I hope the candles have very becoming shades.

PHIPPS.  We have had no complaints about them, madam, as yet.

[_Passes into the drawing-room and begins to light the candles_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_To herself_.]  I wonder what woman he is waiting for
to-night.  It will be delightful to catch him.  Men always look so silly
when they are caught.  And they are always being caught.  [_Looks about
room and approaches the writing-table_.]  What a very interesting room!
What a very interesting picture!  Wonder what his correspondence is like.
[_Takes up letters_.]  Oh, what a very uninteresting correspondence!
Bills and cards, debts and dowagers!  Who on earth writes to him on pink
paper?  How silly to write on pink paper!  It looks like the beginning of
a middle-class romance.  Romance should never begin with sentiment.  It
should begin with science and end with a settlement.  [_Puts letter
down_, _then takes it up again_.]  I know that handwriting.  That is
Gertrude Chiltern’s.  I remember it perfectly.  The ten commandments in
every stroke of the pen, and the moral law all over the page.  Wonder
what Gertrude is writing to him about?  Something horrid about me, I
suppose.  How I detest that woman!  [_Reads it_.]  ‘I trust you.  I want
you.  I am coming to you.  Gertrude.’  ‘I trust you.  I want you.  I am
coming to you.’

[_A look of triumph comes over her face_.  _She is just about to steal
the letter_, _when_ PHIPPS _comes in_.]

PHIPPS.  The candles in the drawing-room are lit, madam, as you directed.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thank you.  [_Rises hastily and slips the letter under a
large silver-cased blotting-book that is lying on the table_.]

PHIPPS.  I trust the shades will be to your liking, madam.  They are the
most becoming we have.  They are the same as his lordship uses himself
when he is dressing for dinner.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a smile_.]  Then I am sure they will be perfectly
right.

PHIPPS.  [_Gravely_.]  Thank you, madam.

[MRS. CHEVELEY _goes into the drawing-room_.  PHIPPS _closes the door and
retires_.  _The door is then slowly opened_, _and_ MRS. CHEVELEY _comes
out and creeps stealthily towards the writing-table_.  _Suddenly voices
are heard from the smoking-room_.  MRS. CHEVELEY _grows pale_, _and
stops_.  _The voices grow louder_, _and she goes back into the
drawing-room_, _biting her lip_.]

[_Enter_ LORD GORING _and_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]

LORD GORING.  [_Expostulating_.]  My dear father, if I am to get married,
surely you will allow me to choose the time, place, and person?
Particularly the person.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Testily_.]  That is a matter for me, sir.  You would
probably make a very poor choice.  It is I who should be consulted, not
you.  There is property at stake.  It is not a matter for affection.
Affection comes later on in married life.

LORD GORING.  Yes.  In married life affection comes when people
thoroughly dislike each other, father, doesn’t it?  [_Puts on_ LORD
CAVERSHAM’S _cloak for him_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Certainly, sir.  I mean certainly not, air.  You are
talking very foolishly to-night.  What I say is that marriage is a matter
for common sense.

LORD GORING.  But women who have common sense are so curiously plain,
father, aren’t they?  Of course I only speak from hearsay.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  No woman, plain or pretty, has any common sense at all,
sir.  Common sense is the privilege of our sex.

LORD GORING.  Quite so.  And we men are so self-sacrificing that we never
use it, do we, father?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I use it, sir.  I use nothing else.

LORD GORING.  So my mother tells me.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  It is the secret of your mother’s happiness.  You are
very heartless, sir, very heartless.

LORD GORING.  I hope not, father.

[_Goes out for a moment_.  _Then returns_, _looking rather put out_,
_with_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My dear Arthur, what a piece of good luck meeting
you on the doorstep!  Your servant had just told me you were not at home.
How extraordinary!

LORD GORING.  The fact is, I am horribly busy to-night, Robert, and I
gave orders I was not at home to any one.  Even my father had a
comparatively cold reception.  He complained of a draught the whole time.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Ah! you must be at home to me, Arthur.  You are my
best friend.  Perhaps by to-morrow you will be my only friend.  My wife
has discovered everything.

LORD GORING.  Ah! I guessed as much!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Looking at him_.]  Really!  How?

LORD GORING.  [_After some hesitation_.]  Oh, merely by something in the
expression of your face as you came in.  Who told her?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Mrs. Cheveley herself.  And the woman I love knows
that I began my career with an act of low dishonesty, that I built up my
life upon sands of shame—that I sold, like a common huckster, the secret
that had been intrusted to me as a man of honour.  I thank heaven poor
Lord Radley died without knowing that I betrayed him.  I would to God I
had died before I had been so horribly tempted, or had fallen so low.
[_Burying his face in his hands_.]

LORD GORING.  [_After a pause_.]  You have heard nothing from Vienna yet,
in answer to your wire?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Looking up_.]  Yes; I got a telegram from the
first secretary at eight o’clock to-night.

LORD GORING.  Well?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Nothing is absolutely known against her.  On the
contrary, she occupies a rather high position in society.  It is a sort
of open secret that Baron Arnheim left her the greater portion of his
immense fortune.  Beyond that I can learn nothing.

LORD GORING.  She doesn’t turn out to be a spy, then?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh! spies are of no use nowadays.  Their profession
is over.  The newspapers do their work instead.

LORD GORING.  And thunderingly well they do it.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur, I am parched with thirst.  May I ring for
something?  Some hock and seltzer?

LORD GORING.  Certainly.  Let me.  [_Rings the bell_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Thanks!  I don’t know what to do, Arthur, I don’t
know what to do, and you are my only friend.  But what a friend you
are—the one friend I can trust.  I can trust you absolutely, can’t I?

[_Enter_ PHIPPS.]

LORD GORING.  My dear Robert, of course.  Oh!  [_To_ PHIPPS.]  Bring some
hock and seltzer.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  And Phipps!

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Will you excuse me for a moment, Robert?  I want to give
some directions to my servant.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Certainly.

LORD GORING.  When that lady calls, tell her that I am not expected home
this evening.  Tell her that I have been suddenly called out of town.
You understand?

PHIPPS.  The lady is in that room, my lord.  You told me to show her into
that room, my lord.

LORD GORING.  You did perfectly right.  [_Exit_ PHIPPS.]  What a mess I
am in.  No; I think I shall get through it.  I’ll give her a lecture
through the door.  Awkward thing to manage, though.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur, tell me what I should do.  My life seems to
have crumbled about me.  I am a ship without a rudder in a night without
a star.

LORD GORING.  Robert, you love your wife, don’t you?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I love her more than anything in the world.  I used
to think ambition the great thing.  It is not.  Love is the great thing
in the world.  There is nothing but love, and I love her.  But I am
defamed in her eyes.  I am ignoble in her eyes.  There is a wide gulf
between us now.  She has found me out, Arthur, she has found me out.

LORD GORING.  Has she never in her life done some folly—some
indiscretion—that she should not forgive your sin?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My wife!  Never!  She does not know what weakness
or temptation is.  I am of clay like other men.  She stands apart as good
women do—pitiless in her perfection—cold and stern and without mercy.
But I love her, Arthur.  We are childless, and I have no one else to
love, no one else to love me.  Perhaps if God had sent us children she
might have been kinder to me.  But God has given us a lonely house.  And
she has cut my heart in two.  Don’t let us talk of it.  I was brutal to
her this evening.  But I suppose when sinners talk to saints they are
brutal always.  I said to her things that were hideously true, on my
side, from my stand-point, from the standpoint of men.  But don’t let us
talk of that.

LORD GORING.  Your wife will forgive you.  Perhaps at this moment she is
forgiving you.  She loves you, Robert.  Why should she not forgive?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  God grant it!  God grant it!  [_Buries his face in
his hands_.]  But there is something more I have to tell you, Arthur.

[_Enter_ PHIPPS _with drinks_.]

PHIPPS.  [_Hands hock and seltzer to_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]  Hock and
seltzer, sir.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Thank you.

LORD GORING.  Is your carriage here, Robert?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  No; I walked from the club.

LORD GORING.  Sir Robert will take my cab, Phipps.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.  [_Exit_.]

LORD GORING.  Robert, you don’t mind my sending you away?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur, you must let me stay for five minutes.  I
have made up my mind what I am going to do to-night in the House.  The
debate on the Argentine Canal is to begin at eleven.  [_A chair falls in
the drawing-room_.]  What is that?

LORD GORING.  Nothing.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I heard a chair fall in the next room.  Some one
has been listening.

LORD GORING.  No, no; there is no one there.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  There is some one.  There are lights in the room,
and the door is ajar.  Some one has been listening to every secret of my
life.  Arthur, what does this mean?

LORD GORING.  Robert, you are excited, unnerved.  I tell you there is no
one in that room. Sit down, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Do you give me your word that there is no one
there?

LORD GORING.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Your word of honour?  [_Sits down_.]

LORD GORING.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rises_.]  Arthur, let me see for myself.

LORD GORING.  No, no.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  If there is no one there why should I not look in
that room?  Arthur, you must let me go into that room and satisfy myself.
Let me know that no eavesdropper has heard my life’s secret.  Arthur, you
don’t realise what I am going through.

LORD GORING.  Robert, this must stop.  I have told you that there is no
one in that room—that is enough.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rushes to the door of the room_.]  It is not
enough.  I insist on going into this room.  You have told me there is no
one there, so what reason can you have for refusing me?

LORD GORING.  For God’s sake, don’t!  There is some one there.  Some one
whom you must not see.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Ah, I thought so!

LORD GORING.  I forbid you to enter that room.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Stand back.  My life is at stake.  And I don’t care
who is there.  I will know who it is to whom I have told my secret and my
shame.  [_Enters room_.]

LORD GORING.  Great heavens! his own wife!

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _comes back_, _with a look of scorn and anger on his
face_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What explanation have you to give me for the
presence of that woman here?

LORD GORING.  Robert, I swear to you on my honour that that lady is
stainless and guiltless of all offence towards you.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  She is a vile, an infamous thing!

LORD GORING.  Don’t say that, Robert!  It was for your sake she came
here.  It was to try and save you she came here.  She loves you and no
one else.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You are mad.  What have I to do with her intrigues
with you?  Let her remain your mistress!  You are well suited to each
other.  She, corrupt and shameful—you, false as a friend, treacherous as
an enemy even—

LORD GORING.  It is not true, Robert.  Before heaven, it is not true.  In
her presence and in yours I will explain all.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Let me pass, sir.  You have lied enough upon your
word of honour.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _goes out_.  LORD GORING _rushes to the door of the
drawing-room_, _when_ MRS. CHEVELEY _comes out_, _looking radiant and
much amused_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a mock curtsey_]  Good evening, Lord Goring!

LORD GORING.  Mrs. Cheveley!  Great heavens! . . . May I ask what you
were doing in my drawing-room?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Merely listening.  I have a perfect passion for listening
through keyholes.  One always hears such wonderful things through them.

LORD GORING.  Doesn’t that sound rather like tempting Providence?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh! surely Providence can resist temptation by this time.
[_Makes a sign to him to take her cloak off_, _which he does_.]

LORD GORING.  I am glad you have called.  I am going to give you some
good advice.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh! pray don’t.  One should never give a woman anything
that she can’t wear in the evening.

LORD GORING.  I see you are quite as wilful as you used to be.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Far more!  I have greatly improved.  I have had more
experience.

LORD GORING.  Too much experience is a dangerous thing.  Pray have a
cigarette.  Half the pretty women in London smoke cigarettes.  Personally
I prefer the other half.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.  I never smoke.  My dressmaker wouldn’t like it,
and a woman’s first duty in life is to her dressmaker, isn’t it?  What
the second duty is, no one has as yet discovered.

LORD GORING.  You have come here to sell me Robert Chiltern’s letter,
haven’t you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  To offer it to you on conditions.  How did you guess
that?

LORD GORING.  Because you haven’t mentioned the subject.  Have you got it
with you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Sitting down_.]  Oh, no!  A well-made dress has no
pockets.

LORD GORING.  What is your price for it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  How absurdly English you are!  The English think that a
cheque-book can solve every problem in life.  Why, my dear Arthur, I have
very much more money than you have, and quite as much as Robert Chiltern
has got hold of.  Money is not what I want.

LORD GORING.  What do you want then, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Why don’t you call me Laura?

LORD GORING.  I don’t like the name.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You used to adore it.

LORD GORING.  Yes: that’s why.  [MRS. CHEVELEY _motions to him to sit
down beside her_.  _He smiles_, _and does so_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Arthur, you loved me once.

LORD GORING.  Yes.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  And you asked me to be your wife.

LORD GORING.  That was the natural result of my loving you.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  And you threw me over because you saw, or said you saw,
poor old Lord Mortlake trying to have a violent flirtation with me in the
conservatory at Tenby.

LORD GORING.  I am under the impression that my lawyer settled that
matter with you on certain terms . . . dictated by yourself.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  At that time I was poor; you were rich.

LORD GORING.  Quite so.  That is why you pretended to love me.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Shrugging her shoulders_.]  Poor old Lord Mortlake, who
had only two topics of conversation, his gout and his wife!  I never
could quite make out which of the two he was talking about.  He used the
most horrible language about them both.  Well, you were silly, Arthur.
Why, Lord Mortlake was never anything more to me than an amusement.  One
of those utterly tedious amusements one only finds at an English country
house on an English country Sunday.  I don’t think any one at all morally
responsible for what he or she does at an English country house.

LORD GORING.  Yes.  I know lots of people think that.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I loved you, Arthur.

LORD GORING.  My dear Mrs. Cheveley, you have always been far too clever
to know anything about love.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I did love you.  And you loved me.  You know you loved
me; and love is a very wonderful thing.  I suppose that when a man has
once loved a woman, he will do anything for her, except continue to love
her?  [_Puts her hand on his_.]

LORD GORING.  [_Taking his hand away quietly_.]  Yes: except that.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_After a pause_.]  I am tired of living abroad.  I want
to come back to London.  I want to have a charming house here.  I want to
have a salon.  If one could only teach the English how to talk, and the
Irish how to listen, society here would be quite civilised.  Besides, I
have arrived at the romantic stage.  When I saw you last night at the
Chilterns’, I knew you were the only person I had ever cared for, if I
ever have cared for anybody, Arthur.  And so, on the morning of the day
you marry me, I will give you Robert Chiltern’s letter.  That is my
offer.  I will give it to you now, if you promise to marry me.

LORD GORING.  Now?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Smiling_.]  To-morrow.

LORD GORING.  Are you really serious?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes, quite serious.

LORD GORING.  I should make you a very bad husband.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I don’t mind bad husbands.  I have had two.  They amused
me immensely.

LORD GORING.  You mean that you amused yourself immensely, don’t you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  What do you know about my married life?

LORD GORING.  Nothing: but I can read it like a book.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  What book?

LORD GORING.  [_Rising_.]  The Book of Numbers.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Do you think it is quite charming of you to be so rude to
a woman in your own house?

LORD GORING.  In the case of very fascinating women, sex is a challenge,
not a defence.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I suppose that is meant for a compliment.  My dear
Arthur, women are never disarmed by compliments.  Men always are.  That
is the difference between the two sexes.

LORD GORING.  Women are never disarmed by anything, as far as I know
them.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_After a pause_.]  Then you are going to allow your
greatest friend, Robert Chiltern, to be ruined, rather than marry some
one who really has considerable attractions left.  I thought you would
have risen to some great height of self-sacrifice, Arthur.  I think you
should.  And the rest of your life you could spend in contemplating your
own perfections.

LORD GORING.  Oh! I do that as it is.  And self-sacrifice is a thing that
should be put down by law.  It is so demoralising to the people for whom
one sacrifices oneself.  They always go to the bad.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  As if anything could demoralise Robert Chiltern!  You
seem to forget that I know his real character.

LORD GORING.  What you know about him is not his real character.  It was
an act of folly done in his youth, dishonourable, I admit, shameful, I
admit, unworthy of him, I admit, and therefore . . . not his true
character.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  How you men stand up for each other!

LORD GORING.  How you women war against each other!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Bitterly_.]  I only war against one woman, against
Gertrude Chiltern.  I hate her.  I hate her now more than ever.

LORD GORING.  Because you have brought a real tragedy into her life, I
suppose.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a sneer_.]  Oh, there is only one real tragedy in
a woman’s life.  The fact that her past is always her lover, and her
future invariably her husband.

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern knows nothing of the kind of life to which
you are alluding.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  A woman whose size in gloves is seven and three-quarters
never knows much about anything.  You know Gertrude has always worn seven
and three-quarters?  That is one of the reasons why there was never any
moral sympathy between us. . . . Well, Arthur, I suppose this romantic
interview may be regarded as at an end.  You admit it was romantic, don’t
you?  For the privilege of being your wife I was ready to surrender a
great prize, the climax of my diplomatic career.  You decline.  Very
well.  If Sir Robert doesn’t uphold my Argentine scheme, I expose him.
Voilà tout.

LORD GORING.  You mustn’t do that.  It would be vile, horrible, infamous.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Shrugging her shoulders_.]  Oh! don’t use big words.
They mean so little.  It is a commercial transaction.  That is all.
There is no good mixing up sentimentality in it.  I offered to sell
Robert Chiltern a certain thing.  If he won’t pay me my price, he will
have to pay the world a greater price.  There is no more to be said.  I
must go.  Good-bye.  Won’t you shake hands?

LORD GORING.  With you?  No.  Your transaction with Robert Chiltern may
pass as a loathsome commercial transaction of a loathsome commercial age;
but you seem to have forgotten that you came here to-night to talk of
love, you whose lips desecrated the word love, you to whom the thing is a
book closely sealed, went this afternoon to the house of one of the most
noble and gentle women in the world to degrade her husband in her eyes,
to try and kill her love for him, to put poison in her heart, and
bitterness in her life, to break her idol, and, it may be, spoil her
soul.  That I cannot forgive you.  That was horrible.  For that there can
be no forgiveness.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Arthur, you are unjust to me.  Believe me, you are quite
unjust to me.  I didn’t go to taunt Gertrude at all.  I had no idea of
doing anything of the kind when I entered.  I called with Lady Markby
simply to ask whether an ornament, a jewel, that I lost somewhere last
night, had been found at the Chilterns’.  If you don’t believe me, you
can ask Lady Markby.  She will tell you it is true.  The scene that
occurred happened after Lady Markby had left, and was really forced on me
by Gertrude’s rudeness and sneers.  I called, oh!—a little out of malice
if you like—but really to ask if a diamond brooch of mine had been found.
That was the origin of the whole thing.

LORD GORING.  A diamond snake-brooch with a ruby?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  How do you know?

LORD GORING.  Because it is found.  In point of fact, I found it myself,
and stupidly forgot to tell the butler anything about it as I was
leaving.  [_Goes over to the writing-table and pulls out the drawers_.]
It is in this drawer.  No, that one.  This is the brooch, isn’t it?
[_Holds up the brooch_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  I am so glad to get it back.  It was . . a present.

LORD GORING.  Won’t you wear it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Certainly, if you pin it in.  [LORD GORING _suddenly
clasps it on her arm_.]  Why do you put it on as a bracelet?  I never
knew it could he worn as a bracelet.

LORD GORING.  Really?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Holding out her handsome arm_.]  No; but it looks very
well on me as a bracelet, doesn’t it?

LORD GORING.  Yes; much better than when I saw it last.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  When did you see it last?

LORD GORING.  [_Calmly_.]  Oh, ten years ago, on Lady Berkshire, from
whom you stole it.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Starting_.]  What do you mean?

LORD GORING.  I mean that you stole that ornament from my cousin, Mary
Berkshire, to whom I gave it when she was married.  Suspicion fell on a
wretched servant, who was sent away in disgrace.  I recognised it last
night.  I determined to say nothing about it till I had found the thief.
I have found the thief now, and I have heard her own confession.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Tossing her head_.]  It is not true.

LORD GORING.  You know it is true.  Why, thief is written across your
face at this moment.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I will deny the whole affair from beginning to end.  I
will say that I have never seen this wretched thing, that it was never in
my possession.

[MRS. CHEVELEY _tries to get the bracelet off her arm_, _but fails_.
LORD GORING _looks on amused_.  _Her thin fingers tear at the jewel to no
purpose_.  _A curse breaks from her_.]

LORD GORING.  The drawback of stealing a thing, Mrs. Cheveley, is that
one never knows how wonderful the thing that one steals is.  You can’t
get that bracelet off, unless you know where the spring is.  And I see
you don’t know where the spring is.  It is rather difficult to find.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You brute!  You coward!  [_She tries again to unclasp the
bracelet_, _but fails_.]

LORD GORING.  Oh! don’t use big words.  They mean so little.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Again tears at the bracelet in a paroxysm of rage_,
_with inarticulate sounds_.  _Then stops_, _and looks at_ LORD GORING.]
What are you going to do?

LORD GORING.  I am going to ring for my servant.  He is an admirable
servant.  Always comes in the moment one rings for him.  When he comes I
will tell him to fetch the police.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Trembling_.]  The police?  What for?

LORD GORING.  To-morrow the Berkshires will prosecute you.  That is what
the police are for.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Is now in an agony of physical terror_.  _Her face is
distorted_.  _Her mouth awry_.  _A mask has fallen from her_.  _She it_,
_for the moment_, _dreadful to look at_.]  Don’t do that.  I will do
anything you want.  Anything in the world you want.

LORD GORING.  Give me Robert Chiltern’s letter.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Stop! Stop!  Let me have time to think.

LORD GORING.  Give me Robert Chiltern’s letter.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I have not got it with me.  I will give it to you
to-morrow.

LORD GORING.  You know you are lying.  Give it to me at once.  [MRS.
CHEVELEY _pulls the letter out_, _and hands it to him_.  _She is horribly
pale_.]  This is it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_In a hoarse voice_.]  Yes.

LORD GORING.  [_Takes the letter_, _examines it_, _sighs_, _and burns it
with the lamp_.]  For so well-dressed a woman, Mrs. Cheveley, you have
moments of admirable common sense.  I congratulate you.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Catches sight of_ LADY CHILTERN’S _letter_, _the cover
of which is just showing from under the blotting-book_.]  Please get me a
glass of water.

LORD GORING.  Certainly.  [_Goes to the corner of the room and pours out
a glass of water_.  _While his back is turned_ MRS. CHEVELEY _steals_
LADY CHILTERN’S _letter_.  _When_ LORD GORING _returns the glass she
refuses it with a gesture_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thank you.  Will you help me on with my cloak?

LORD GORING.  With pleasure.  [_Puts her cloak on_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.  I am never going to try to harm Robert Chiltern
again.

LORD GORING.  Fortunately you have not the chance, Mrs. Cheveley.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Well, if even I had the chance, I wouldn’t.  On the
contrary, I am going to render him a great service.

LORD GORING.  I am charmed to hear it.  It is a reformation.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  I can’t bear so upright a gentleman, so honourable
an English gentleman, being so shamefully deceived, and so—

LORD GORING.  Well?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I find that somehow Gertrude Chiltern’s dying speech and
confession has strayed into my pocket.

LORD GORING.  What do you mean?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a bitter note of triumph in her voice_.]  I mean
that I am going to send Robert Chiltern the love-letter his wife wrote to
you to-night.

LORD GORING.  Love-letter?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Laughing_.]  ‘I want you.  I trust you.  I am coming to
you.  Gertrude.’

[LORD GORING _rushes to the bureau and takes up the envelope_, _finds is
empty_, _and turns round_.]

LORD GORING.  You wretched woman, must you always be thieving?  Give me
back that letter.  I’ll take it from you by force.  You shall not leave
my room till I have got it.

[_He rushes towards her_, _but_ MRS. CHEVELEY _at once puts her hand on
the electric bell that is on the table_. _The bell sounds with shrill
reverberations_, _and_ PHIPPS _enters_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_After a pause_.]  Lord Goring merely rang that you
should show me out.  Good-night, Lord Goring!

[_Goes out followed by_ PHIPPS.  _Her face is illumined with evil
triumph_.  _There is joy in her eyes_.  _Youth seems to have come back to
her_.  _Her last glance is like a swift arrow_.  LORD GORING _bites his
lip_, _and lights his a cigarette_.]

                                ACT DROPS




FOURTH ACT


SCENE


_Same as Act II_.

[LORD GORING _is standing by the fireplace with his hands in his
pockets_.  _He is looking rather bored_.]

LORD GORING.  [_Pulls out his watch_, _inspects it_, _and rings the
bell_.]  It is a great nuisance.  I can’t find any one in this house to
talk to.  And I am full of interesting information.  I feel like the
latest edition of something or other.

[_Enter servant_.]

JAMES.  Sir Robert is still at the Foreign Office, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern not down yet?

JAMES.  Her ladyship has not yet left her room.  Miss Chiltern has just
come in from riding.

LORD GORING.  [_To himself_.]  Ah! that is something.

JAMES.  Lord Caversham has been waiting some time in the library for Sir
Robert.  I told him your lordship was here.

LORD GORING.  Thank you!  Would you kindly tell him I’ve gone?

JAMES.  [_Bowing_.]  I shall do so, my lord.

[_Exit servant_.]

LORD GORING.  Really, I don’t want to meet my father three days running.
It is a great deal too much excitement for any son.  I hope to goodness
he won’t come up.  Fathers should be neither seen nor heard.  That is the
only proper basis for family life.  Mothers are different.  Mothers are
darlings.  [_Throws himself down into a chair_, _picks up a paper and
begins to read it_.]

[_Enter_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir, what are you doing here?  Wasting your time
as usual, I suppose?

LORD GORING.  [_Throws down paper and rises_.]  My dear father, when one
pays a visit it is for the purpose of wasting other people’s time, not
one’s own.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Have you been thinking over what I spoke to you about
last night?

LORD GORING.  I have been thinking about nothing else.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Engaged to be married yet?

LORD GORING.  [_Genially_.]  Not yet: but I hope to be before lunch-time.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Caustically_.]  You can have till dinner-time if it
would be of any convenience to you.

LORD GORING.  Thanks awfully, but I think I’d sooner be engaged before
lunch.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Humph!  Never know when you are serious or not.

LORD GORING.  Neither do I, father.

[_A pause_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I suppose you have read _The Times_ this morning?

LORD GORING.  [_Airily_.]  The Times?  Certainly not.  I only read _The
Morning Post_.  All that one should know about modern life is where the
Duchesses are; anything else is quite demoralising.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Do you mean to say you have not read _The Times_ leading
article on Robert Chiltern’s career?

LORD GORING.  Good heavens!  No.  What does it say?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What should it say, sir?  Everything complimentary, of
course.  Chiltern’s speech last night on this Argentine Canal scheme was
one of the finest pieces of oratory ever delivered in the House since
Canning.

LORD GORING.  Ah!  Never heard of Canning.  Never wanted to.  And did . . .
did Chiltern uphold the scheme?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Uphold it, sir?  How little you know him!  Why, he
denounced it roundly, and the whole system of modern political finance.
This speech is the turning-point in his career, as _The Times_ points
out.  You should read this article, sir.  [_Opens_ The Times.]  ‘Sir
Robert Chiltern . . . most rising of our young statesmen . . . Brilliant
Orator . . . Unblemished career . . . Well-known integrity of character
. . . Represents what is best in English public life . . . Noble contrast
to the lax morality so common among foreign politicians.’  They will
never say that of you, sir.

LORD GORING.  I sincerely hope not, father.  However, I am delighted at
what you tell me about Robert, thoroughly delighted.  It shows he has got
pluck.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  He has got more than pluck, sir, he has got genius.

LORD GORING.  Ah! I prefer pluck.  It is not so common, nowadays, as
genius is.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I wish you would go into Parliament.

LORD GORING.  My dear father, only people who look dull ever get into the
House of Commons, and only people who are dull ever succeed there.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Why don’t you try to do something useful in life?

LORD GORING.  I am far too young.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Testily_.]  I hate this affectation of youth, sir.  It
is a great deal too prevalent nowadays.

LORD GORING.  Youth isn’t an affectation.  Youth is an art.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Why don’t you propose to that pretty Miss Chiltern?

LORD GORING.  I am of a very nervous disposition, especially in the
morning.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I don’t suppose there is the smallest chance of her
accepting you.

LORD GORING.  I don’t know how the betting stands to-day.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  If she did accept you she would be the prettiest fool in
England.

LORD GORING.  That is just what I should like to marry.  A thoroughly
sensible wife would reduce me to a condition of absolute idiocy in less
than six months.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You don’t deserve her, sir.

LORD GORING.  My dear father, if we men married the women we deserved, we
should have a very bad time of it.

[_Enter_ MABEL CHILTERN.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! . . . How do you do, Lord Caversham?  I hope Lady
Caversham is quite well?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Lady Caversham is as usual, as usual.

LORD GORING.  Good morning, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Taking no notice at all of_ LORD GORING, _and
addressing herself exclusively to_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]  And Lady Caversham’s
bonnets . . . are they at all better?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  They have had a serious relapse, I am sorry to say.

LORD GORING.  Good morning, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_To_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]  I hope an operation will not be
necessary.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Smiling at her pertness_.]  If it is, we shall have to
give Lady Caversham a narcotic.  Otherwise she would never consent to
have a feather touched.

LORD GORING.  [_With increased emphasis_.]  Good morning, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Turning round with feigned surprise_.]  Oh, are you
here?  Of course you understand that after your breaking your appointment
I am never going to speak to you again.

LORD GORING.  Oh, please don’t say such a thing.  You are the one person
in London I really like to have to listen to me.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Lord Goring, I never believe a single word that either
you or I say to each other.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You are quite right, my dear, quite right . . . as far
as he is concerned, I mean.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Do you think you could possibly make your son behave a
little better occasionally?  Just as a change.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I regret to say, Miss Chiltern, that I have no influence
at all over my son.  I wish I had.  If I had, I know what I would make
him do.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I am afraid that he has one of those terribly weak
natures that are not susceptible to influence.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  He is very heartless, very heartless.

LORD GORING.  It seems to me that I am a little in the way here.

MABEL CHILTERN.  It is very good for you to be in the way, and to know
what people say of you behind your back.

LORD GORING.  I don’t at all like knowing what people say of me behind my
back.  It makes me far too conceited.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  After that, my dear, I really must bid you good morning.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! I hope you are not going to leave me all alone with
Lord Goring?  Especially at such an early hour in the day.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I am afraid I can’t take him with me to Downing Street.
It is not the Prime Minster’s day for seeing the unemployed.

[_Shakes hands with_ MABEL CHILTERN, _takes up his hat and stick_, _and
goes out_, _with a parting glare of indignation at_ LORD GORING.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Takes up roses and begins to arrange them in a bowl on
the table_.]  People who don’t keep their appointments in the Park are
horrid.

LORD GORING.  Detestable.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I am glad you admit it.  But I wish you wouldn’t look so
pleased about it.

LORD GORING.  I can’t help it.  I always look pleased when I am with you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Sadly_.]  Then I suppose it is my duty to remain with
you?

LORD GORING.  Of course it is.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Well, my duty is a thing I never do, on principle.  It
always depresses me.  So I am afraid I must leave you.

LORD GORING.  Please don’t, Miss Mabel.  I have something very particular
to say to you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Rapturously_.]  Oh! is it a proposal?

LORD GORING.  [_Somewhat taken aback_.]  Well, yes, it is—I am bound to
say it is.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a sigh of pleasure_.]  I am so glad.  That makes
the second to-day.

LORD GORING.  [_Indignantly_.]  The second to-day?  What conceited ass
has been impertinent enough to dare to propose to you before I had
proposed to you?

MABEL CHILTERN.  Tommy Trafford, of course.  It is one of Tommy’s days
for proposing.  He always proposes on Tuesdays and Thursdays, during the
Season.

LORD GORING.  You didn’t accept him, I hope?

MABEL CHILTERN.  I make it a rule never to accept Tommy.  That is why he
goes on proposing.  Of course, as you didn’t turn up this morning, I very
nearly said yes.  It would have been an excellent lesson both for him and
for you if I had.  It would have taught you both better manners.

LORD GORING.  Oh! bother Tommy Trafford.  Tommy is a silly little ass.  I
love you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I know.  And I think you might have mentioned it before.
I am sure I have given you heaps of opportunities.

LORD GORING.  Mabel, do be serious.  Please be serious.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Ah! that is the sort of thing a man always says to a
girl before he has been married to her.  He never says it afterwards.

LORD GORING.  [_Taking hold of her hand_.]  Mabel, I have told you that I
love you.  Can’t you love me a little in return?

MABEL CHILTERN.  You silly Arthur!  If you knew anything about . . .
anything, which you don’t, you would know that I adore you.  Every one in
London knows it except you.  It is a public scandal the way I adore you.
I have been going about for the last six months telling the whole of
society that I adore you.  I wonder you consent to have anything to say
to me.  I have no character left at all.  At least, I feel so happy that
I am quite sure I have no character left at all.

LORD GORING.  [_Catches her in his arms and kisses her_.  _Then there is
a pause of bliss_.]  Dear!  Do you know I was awfully afraid of being
refused!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Looking up at him_.]  But you never have been refused
yet by anybody, have you, Arthur?  I can’t imagine any one refusing you.

LORD GORING.  [_After kissing her again_.]  Of course I’m not nearly good
enough for you, Mabel.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Nestling close to him_.]  I am so glad, darling.  I
was afraid you were.

LORD GORING.  [_After some hesitation_.]  And I’m . . . I’m a little over
thirty.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Dear, you look weeks younger than that.

LORD GORING.  [_Enthusiastically_.]  How sweet of you to say so! . . .
And it is only fair to tell you frankly that I am fearfully extravagant.

MABEL CHILTERN.  But so am I, Arthur.  So we’re sure to agree.  And now I
must go and see Gertrude.

LORD GORING.  Must you really?  [_Kisses her_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Yes.

LORD GORING.  Then do tell her I want to talk to her particularly.  I
have been waiting here all the morning to see either her or Robert.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Do you mean to say you didn’t come here expressly to
propose to me?

LORD GORING.  [_Triumphantly_.]  No; that was a flash of genius.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Your first.

LORD GORING.  [_With determination_.]  My last.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I am delighted to hear it.  Now don’t stir.  I’ll be
back in five minutes.  And don’t fall into any temptations while I am
away.

LORD GORING.  Dear Mabel, while you are away, there are none.  It makes
me horribly dependent on you.

[_Enter_ LADY CHILTERN.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Good morning, dear!  How pretty you are looking!

MABEL CHILTERN.  How pale you are looking, Gertrude!  It is most
becoming!

LADY CHILTERN.  Good morning, Lord Goring!

LORD GORING.  [_Bowing_.]  Good morning, Lady Chiltern!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Aside to_ LORD GORING.]  I shall be in the
conservatory under the second palm tree on the left.

LORD GORING.  Second on the left?

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a look of mock surprise_.]  Yes; the usual palm
tree.

[_Blows a kiss to him_, _unobserved by_ LADY CHILTERN, _and goes out_.]

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern, I have a certain amount of very good news to
tell you.  Mrs. Cheveley gave me up Robert’s letter last night, and I
burned it.  Robert is safe.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Sinking on the sofa_.]  Safe!  Oh! I am so glad of
that.  What a good friend you are to him—to us!

LORD GORING.  There is only one person now that could be said to be in
any danger.

LADY CHILTERN.  Who is that?

LORD GORING.  [_Sitting down beside her_.]  Yourself.

LADY CHILTERN.  I?  In danger?  What do you mean?

LORD GORING.  Danger is too great a word.  It is a word I should not have
used.  But I admit I have something to tell you that may distress you,
that terribly distresses me.  Yesterday evening you wrote me a very
beautiful, womanly letter, asking me for my help.  You wrote to me as one
of your oldest friends, one of your husband’s oldest friends.  Mrs.
Cheveley stole that letter from my rooms.

LADY CHILTERN.  Well, what use is it to her?  Why should she not have it?

LORD GORING.  [_Rising_.]  Lady Chiltern, I will be quite frank with you.
Mrs. Cheveley puts a certain construction on that letter and proposes to
send it to your husband.

LADY CHILTERN.  But what construction could she put on it? . . . Oh! not
that! not that!  If I in—in trouble, and wanting your help, trusting you,
propose to come to you . . . that you may advise me . . . assist me . . .
Oh! are there women so horrible as that . . .?  And she proposes to send
it to my husband?  Tell me what happened.  Tell me all that happened.

LORD GORING.  Mrs. Cheveley was concealed in a room adjoining my library,
without my knowledge.  I thought that the person who was waiting in that
room to see me was yourself.  Robert came in unexpectedly.  A chair or
something fell in the room.  He forced his way in, and he discovered her.
We had a terrible scene.  I still thought it was you.  He left me in
anger.  At the end of everything Mrs. Cheveley got possession of your
letter—she stole it, when or how, I don’t know.

LADY CHILTERN.  At what hour did this happen?

LORD GORING.  At half-past ten.  And now I propose that we tell Robert
the whole thing at once.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Looking at him with amazement that is almost terror_.]
You want me to tell Robert that the woman you expected was not Mrs.
Cheveley, but myself?  That it was I whom you thought was concealed in a
room in your house, at half-past ten o’clock at night?  You want me to
tell him that?

LORD GORING.  I think it is better that he should know the exact truth.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Rising_.]  Oh, I couldn’t, I couldn’t!

LORD GORING.  May I do it?

LADY CHILTERN.  No.

LORD GORING.  [_Gravely_.]  You are wrong, Lady Chiltern.

LADY CHILTERN.  No.  The letter must be intercepted.  That is all.  But
how can I do it?  Letters arrive for him every moment of the day.  His
secretaries open them and hand them to him.  I dare not ask the servants
to bring me his letters.  It would be impossible.  Oh! why don’t you tell
me what to do?

LORD GORING.  Pray be calm, Lady Chiltern, and answer the questions I am
going to put to you.  You said his secretaries open his letters.

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

LORD GORING.  Who is with him to-day?  Mr. Trafford, isn’t it?

LADY CHILTERN.  No.  Mr. Montford, I think.

LORD GORING.  You can trust him?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_With a gesture of despair_.]  Oh! how do I know?

LORD GORING.  He would do what you asked him, wouldn’t he?

LADY CHILTERN.  I think so.

LORD GORING.  Your letter was on pink paper.  He could recognise it
without reading it, couldn’t he?  By the colour?

LADY CHILTERN.  I suppose so.

LORD GORING.  Is he in the house now?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

LORD GORING.  Then I will go and see him myself, and tell him that a
certain letter, written on pink paper, is to be forwarded to Robert
to-day, and that at all costs it must not reach him.  [_Goes to the
door_, _and opens it_.]  Oh! Robert is coming upstairs with the letter in
his hand.  It has reached him already.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_With a cry of pain_.]  Oh! you have saved his life;
what have you done with mine?

[_Enter_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  _He has the letter in his hand_, _and is
reading it_.  _He comes towards his wife_, _not noticing_ LORD GORING’S
_presence_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  ‘I want you.  I trust you.  I am coming to you.
Gertrude.’  Oh, my love!  Is this true?  Do you indeed trust me, and want
me?  If so, it was for me to come to you, not for you to write of coming
to me.  This letter of yours, Gertrude, makes me feel that nothing that
the world may do can hurt me now.  You want me, Gertrude?

[LORD GORING, _unseen by_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN, _makes an imploring sign
to_ LADY CHILTERN _to accept the situation and_ SIR ROBERT’S _error_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You trust me, Gertrude?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Ah! why did you not add you loved me?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Taking his hand_.]  Because I loved you.

[LORD GORING _passes into the conservatory_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Kisses her_.]  Gertrude, you don’t know what I
feel.  When Montford passed me your letter across the table—he had opened
it by mistake, I suppose, without looking at the handwriting on the
envelope—and I read it—oh! I did not care what disgrace or punishment was
in store for me, I only thought you loved me still.

LADY CHILTERN.  There is no disgrace in store for you, nor any public
shame.  Mrs. Cheveley has handed over to Lord Goring the document that
was in her possession, and he has destroyed it.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Are you sure of this, Gertrude?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes; Lord Goring has just told me.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Then I am safe!  Oh! what a wonderful thing to be
safe!  For two days I have been in terror.  I am safe now.  How did
Arthur destroy my letter?  Tell me.

LADY CHILTERN.  He burned it.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I wish I had seen that one sin of my youth burning
to ashes.  How many men there are in modern life who would like to see
their past burning to white ashes before them!  Is Arthur still here?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes; he is in the conservatory.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am so glad now I made that speech last night in
the House, so glad.  I made it thinking that public disgrace might be the
result.  But it has not been so.

LADY CHILTERN.  Public honour has been the result.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I think so.  I fear so, almost.  For although I am
safe from detection, although every proof against me is destroyed, I
suppose, Gertrude . . . I suppose I should retire from public life?  [_He
looks anxiously at his wife_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Eagerly_.]  Oh yes, Robert, you should do that.  It is
your duty to do that.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It is much to surrender.

LADY CHILTERN.  No; it will be much to gain.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _walks up and down the room with a troubled
expression_.  _Then comes over to his wife_, _and puts his hand on her
shoulder_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And you would be happy living somewhere alone with
me, abroad perhaps, or in the country away from London, away from public
life?  You would have no regrets?

LADY CHILTERN.  Oh! none, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Sadly_.]  And your ambition for me?  You used to
be ambitious for me.

LADY CHILTERN.  Oh, my ambition!  I have none now, but that we two may
love each other.  It was your ambition that led you astray.  Let us not
talk about ambition.

[LORD GORING _returns from the conservatory_, _looking very pleased with
himself_, _and with an entirely new buttonhole that some one has made for
him_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Going towards him_.]  Arthur, I have to thank you
for what you have done for me.  I don’t know how I can repay you.
[_Shakes hands with him_.]

LORD GORING.  My dear fellow, I’ll tell you at once.  At the present
moment, under the usual palm tree . . . I mean in the conservatory . . .

[_Enter_ MASON.]

MASON.  Lord Caversham.

LORD GORING.  That admirable father of mine really makes a habit of
turning up at the wrong moment.  It is very heartless of him, very
heartless indeed.

[_Enter_ LORD CAVERSHAM.  MASON _goes out_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Good morning, Lady Chiltern!  Warmest congratulations to
you, Chiltern, on your brilliant speech last night.  I have just left the
Prime Minister, and you are to have the vacant seat in the Cabinet.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a look of joy and triumph_.]  A seat in the
Cabinet?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Yes; here is the Prime Minister’s letter.  [_Hands
letter_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Takes letter and reads it_.]  A seat in the
Cabinet!

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Certainly, and you well deserve it too.  You have got
what we want so much in political life nowadays—high character, high
moral tone, high principles.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  Everything that you
have not got, sir, and never will have.

LORD GORING.  I don’t like principles, father.  I prefer prejudices.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _is on the brink of accepting the Prime Minister’s
offer_, _when he sees wife looking at him with her clear_, _candid eyes_.
_He then realises that it is impossible_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I cannot accept this offer, Lord Caversham.  I have
made up my mind to decline it.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Decline it, sir!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My intention is to retire at once from public life.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Angrily_.]  Decline a seat in the Cabinet, and retire
from public life?  Never heard such damned nonsense in the whole course
of my existence.  I beg your pardon, Lady Chiltern.  Chiltern, I beg your
pardon.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  Don’t grin like that, sir.

LORD GORING.  No, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Lady Chiltern, you are a sensible woman, the most
sensible woman in London, the most sensible woman I know.  Will you
kindly prevent your husband from making such a . . . from taking such
. . . Will you kindly do that, Lady Chiltern?

LADY CHILTERN.  I think my husband in right in his determination, Lord
Caversham.  I approve of it.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You approve of it?  Good heavens!

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Taking her husband’s hand_.]  I admire him for it.  I
admire him immensely for it.  I have never admired him so much before.
He is finer than even I thought him.  [_To_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]  You
will go and write your letter to the Prime Minister now, won’t you?
Don’t hesitate about it, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a touch of bitterness_.]  I suppose I had
better write it at once.  Such offers are not repeated.  I will ask you
to excuse me for a moment, Lord Caversham.

LADY CHILTERN.  I may come with you, Robert, may I not?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes, Gertrude.

[LADY CHILTERN _goes out with him_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What is the matter with this family?  Something wrong
here, eh?  [_Tapping his forehead_.]  Idiocy?  Hereditary, I suppose.
Both of them, too.  Wife as well as husband.  Very sad.  Very sad indeed!
And they are not an old family.  Can’t understand it.

LORD GORING.  It is not idiocy, father, I assure you.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What is it then, sir?

LORD GORING.  [_After some hesitation_.]  Well, it is what is called
nowadays a high moral tone, father.  That is all.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Hate these new-fangled names.  Same thing as we used to
call idiocy fifty years ago.  Shan’t stay in this house any longer.

LORD GORING.  [_Taking his arm_.]  Oh! just go in here for a moment,
father.  Third palm tree to the left, the usual palm tree.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What, sir?

LORD GORING.  I beg your pardon, father, I forgot.  The conservatory,
father, the conservatory—there is some one there I want you to talk to.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What about, sir?

LORD GORING.  About me, father,

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Grimly_.]  Not a subject on which much eloquence is
possible.

LORD GORING.  No, father; but the lady is like me.  She doesn’t care much
for eloquence in others.  She thinks it a little loud.

[LORD CAVERSHAM _goes out into the conservatory_.  LADY CHILTERN
_enters_.]

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern, why are you playing Mrs. Cheveley’s cards?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Startled_.]  I don’t understand you.

LORD GORING.  Mrs. Cheveley made an attempt to ruin your husband.  Either
to drive him from public life, or to make him adopt a dishonourable
position.  From the latter tragedy you saved him.  The former you are now
thrusting on him.  Why should you do him the wrong Mrs. Cheveley tried to
do and failed?

LADY CHILTERN.  Lord Goring?

LORD GORING.  [_Pulling himself together for a great effort_, _and
showing the philosopher that underlies the dandy_.]  Lady Chiltern, allow
me.  You wrote me a letter last night in which you said you trusted me
and wanted my help.  Now is the moment when you really want my help, now
is the time when you have got to trust me, to trust in my counsel and
judgment.  You love Robert.  Do you want to kill his love for you?  What
sort of existence will he have if you rob him of the fruits of his
ambition, if you take him from the splendour of a great political career,
if you close the doors of public life against him, if you condemn him to
sterile failure, he who was made for triumph and success?  Women are not
meant to judge us, but to forgive us when we need forgiveness.  Pardon,
not punishment, is their mission.  Why should you scourge him with rods
for a sin done in his youth, before he knew you, before he knew himself?
A man’s life is of more value than a woman’s.  It has larger issues,
wider scope, greater ambitions.  A woman’s life revolves in curves of
emotions.  It is upon lines of intellect that a man’s life progresses.
Don’t make any terrible mistake, Lady Chiltern.  A woman who can keep a
man’s love, and love him in return, has done all the world wants of
women, or should want of them.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Troubled and hesitating_.]  But it is my husband
himself who wishes to retire from public life.  He feels it is his duty.
It was he who first said so.

LORD GORING.  Rather than lose your love, Robert would do anything, wreck
his whole career, as he is on the brink of doing now.  He is making for
you a terrible sacrifice.  Take my advice, Lady Chiltern, and do not
accept a sacrifice so great.  If you do, you will live to repent it
bitterly.  We men and women are not made to accept such sacrifices from
each other.  We are not worthy of them.  Besides, Robert has been
punished enough.

LADY CHILTERN.  We have both been punished.  I set him up too high.

LORD GORING.  [_With deep feeling in his voice_.]  Do not for that reason
set him down now too low.  If he has fallen from his altar, do not thrust
him into the mire.  Failure to Robert would be the very mire of shame.
Power is his passion.  He would lose everything, even his power to feel
love.  Your husband’s life is at this moment in your hands, your
husband’s love is in your hands.  Don’t mar both for him.

[_Enter_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude, here is the draft of my letter.  Shall I
read it to you?

LADY CHILTERN.  Let me see it.

[SIR ROBERT _hands her the letter_.  _She reads it_, _and then_, _with a
gesture of passion_, _tears it up_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What are you doing?

LADY CHILTERN.  A man’s life is of more value than a woman’s.  It has
larger issues, wider scope, greater ambitions.  Our lives revolve in
curves of emotions.  It is upon lines of intellect that a man’s life
progresses.  I have just learnt this, and much else with it, from Lord
Goring.  And I will not spoil your life for you, nor see you spoil it as
a sacrifice to me, a useless sacrifice!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude!  Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  You can forget.  Men easily forget.  And I forgive.  That
is how women help the world.  I see that now.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Deeply overcome by emotion_, _embraces her_.]  My
wife! my wife!  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  Arthur, it seems that I am always to
be in your debt.

LORD GORING.  Oh dear no, Robert.  Your debt is to Lady Chiltern, not to
me!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I owe you much.  And now tell me what you were
going to ask me just now as Lord Caversham came in.

LORD GORING.  Robert, you are your sister’s guardian, and I want your
consent to my marriage with her.  That is all.

LADY CHILTERN.  Oh, I am so glad!  I am so glad!  [_Shakes hands with_
LORD GORING.]

LORD GORING.  Thank you, Lady Chiltern.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a troubled look_.]  My sister to be your
wife?

LORD GORING.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Speaking with great firmness_.]  Arthur, I am
very sorry, but the thing is quite out of the question.  I have to think
of Mabel’s future happiness.  And I don’t think her happiness would be
safe in your hands.  And I cannot have her sacrificed!

LORD GORING.  Sacrificed!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes, utterly sacrificed.  Loveless marriages are
horrible.  But there is one thing worse than an absolutely loveless
marriage.  A marriage in which there is love, but on one side only;
faith, but on one side only; devotion, but on one side only, and in which
of the two hearts one is sure to be broken.

LORD GORING.  But I love Mabel.  No other woman has any place in my life.

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert, if they love each other, why should they not be
married?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur cannot bring Mabel the love that she
deserves.

LORD GORING.  What reason have you for saying that?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_After a pause_.]  Do you really require me to
tell you?

LORD GORING.  Certainly I do.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  As you choose.  When I called on you yesterday
evening I found Mrs. Cheveley concealed in your rooms.  It was between
ten and eleven o’clock at night.  I do not wish to say anything more.
Your relations with Mrs. Cheveley have, as I said to you last night,
nothing whatsoever to do with me.  I know you were engaged to be married
to her once.  The fascination she exercised over you then seems to have
returned.  You spoke to me last night of her as of a woman pure and
stainless, a woman whom you respected and honoured.  That may be so.  But
I cannot give my sister’s life into your hands.  It would be wrong of me.
It would be unjust, infamously unjust to her.

LORD GORING.  I have nothing more to say.

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert, it was not Mrs. Cheveley whom Lord Goring
expected last night.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Not Mrs. Cheveley!  Who was it then?

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern!

LADY CHILTERN.  It was your own wife.  Robert, yesterday afternoon Lord
Goring told me that if ever I was in trouble I could come to him for
help, as he was our oldest and best friend.  Later on, after that
terrible scene in this room, I wrote to him telling him that I trusted
him, that I had need of him, that I was coming to him for help and
advice.  [SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _takes the letter out of his pocket_.]
Yes, that letter.  I didn’t go to Lord Goring’s, after all.  I felt that
it is from ourselves alone that help can come.  Pride made me think that.
Mrs. Cheveley went.  She stole my letter and sent it anonymously to you
this morning, that you should think . . . Oh! Robert, I cannot tell you
what she wished you to think. . . .

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What!  Had I fallen so low in your eyes that you
thought that even for a moment I could have doubted your goodness?
Gertrude, Gertrude, you are to me the white image of all good things, and
sin can never touch you.  Arthur, you can go to Mabel, and you have my
best wishes!  Oh! stop a moment.  There is no name at the beginning of
this letter.  The brilliant Mrs. Cheveley does not seem to have noticed
that.  There should be a name.

LADY CHILTERN.  Let me write yours.  It is you I trust and need.  You and
none else.

LORD GORING.  Well, really, Lady Chiltern, I think I should have back my
own letter.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Smiling_.]  No; you shall have Mabel.  [_Takes the
letter and writes her husband’s name on it_.]

LORD GORING.  Well, I hope she hasn’t changed her mind.  It’s nearly
twenty minutes since I saw her last.

[_Enter_ MABEL CHILTERN _and_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Lord Goring, I think your father’s conversation much
more improving than yours.  I am only going to talk to Lord Caversham in
the future, and always under the usual palm tree.

LORD GORING.  Darling!  [_Kisses her_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Considerably taken aback_.]  What does this mean, sir?
You don’t mean to say that this charming, clever young lady has been so
foolish as to accept you?

LORD GORING.  Certainly, father!  And Chiltern’s been wise enough to
accept the seat in the Cabinet.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I am very glad to hear that, Chiltern . . . I
congratulate you, sir.  If the country doesn’t go to the dogs or the
Radicals, we shall have you Prime Minister, some day.

[_Enter_ MASON.]

MASON.  Luncheon is on the table, my Lady!

[MASON _goes out_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  You’ll stop to luncheon, Lord Caversham, won’t you?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  With pleasure, and I’ll drive you down to Downing Street
afterwards, Chiltern.  You have a great future before you, a great
future.  Wish I could say the same for you, sir.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]
But your career will have to be entirely domestic.

LORD GORING.  Yes, father, I prefer it domestic.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  And if you don’t make this young lady an ideal husband,
I’ll cut you off with a shilling.

MABEL CHILTERN.  An ideal husband!  Oh, I don’t think I should like that.
It sounds like something in the next world.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What do you want him to be then, dear?

MABEL CHILTERN.  He can be what he chooses.  All I want is to be . . . to
be . . . oh! a real wife to him.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Upon my word, there is a good deal of common sense in
that, Lady Chiltern.

[_They all go out except_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  _He sinks in a chair_,
_wrapt in thought_.  _After a little time_ LADY CHILTERN _returns to look
for him_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Leaning over the back of the chair_.]  Aren’t you
coming in, Robert?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Taking her hand_.]  Gertrude, is it love you feel
for me, or is it pity merely?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Kisses him_.]  It is love, Robert.  Love, and only
love.  For both of us a new life is beginning.

                                 CURTAIN


FIRST ACT


                                  SCENE

              _Lawn in front of the terrace at Hunstanton_.

[SIR JOHN _and_ LADY CAROLINE PONTEFRACT, MISS WORSLEY, _on chairs under
large yew tree_.]

LADY CAROLINE.  I believe this is the first English country house you
have stayed at, Miss Worsley?

HESTER.  Yes, Lady Caroline.

LADY CAROLINE.  You have no country houses, I am told, in America?

HESTER.  We have not many.

LADY CAROLINE.  Have you any country?  What we should call country?

HESTER.  [_Smiling_.]  We have the largest country in the world, Lady
Caroline.  They used to tell us at school that some of our states are as
big as France and England put together.

LADY CAROLINE.  Ah! you must find it very draughty, I should fancy.
[_To_ SIR JOHN.]  John, you should have your muffler.  What is the use of
my always knitting mufflers for you if you won’t wear them?

SIR JOHN.  I am quite warm, Caroline, I assure you.

LADY CAROLINE.  I think not, John.  Well, you couldn’t come to a more
charming place than this, Miss Worsley, though the house is excessively
damp, quite unpardonably damp, and dear Lady Hunstanton is sometimes a
little lax about the people she asks down here.  [_To_ SIR JOHN.]  Jane
mixes too much.  Lord Illingworth, of course, is a man of high
distinction.  It is a privilege to meet him.  And that member of
Parliament, Mr. Kettle—

SIR JOHN.  Kelvil, my love, Kelvil.

LADY CAROLINE.  He must be quite respectable.  One has never heard his
name before in the whole course of one’s life, which speaks volumes for a
man, nowadays.  But Mrs. Allonby is hardly a very suitable person.

HESTER.  I dislike Mrs. Allonby.  I dislike her more than I can say.

LADY CAROLINE.  I am not sure, Miss Worsley, that foreigners like
yourself should cultivate likes or dislikes about the people they are
invited to meet.  Mrs. Allonby is very well born.  She is a niece of Lord
Brancaster’s.  It is said, of course, that she ran away twice before she
was married.  But you know how unfair people often are.  I myself don’t
believe she ran away more than once.

HESTER.  Mr. Arbuthnot is very charming.

LADY CAROLINE.  Ah, yes! the young man who has a post in a bank.  Lady
Hunstanton is most kind in asking him here, and Lord Illingworth seems to
have taken quite a fancy to him.  I am not sure, however, that Jane is
right in taking him out of his position.  In my young days, Miss Worsley,
one never met any one in society who worked for their living.  It was not
considered the thing.

HESTER.  In America those are the people we respect most.

LADY CAROLINE.  I have no doubt of it.

HESTER.  Mr. Arbuthnot has a beautiful nature!  He is so simple, so
sincere.  He has one of the most beautiful natures I have ever come
across.  It is a privilege to meet _him_.

LADY CAROLINE.  It is not customary in England, Miss Worsley, for a young
lady to speak with such enthusiasm of any person of the opposite sex.
English women conceal their feelings till after they are married.  They
show them then.

HESTER.  Do you, in England, allow no friendship to exist between a young
man and a young girl?

[_Enter_ LADY HUNSTANTON, _followed by Footman with shawls and a
cushion_.]

LADY CAROLINE.  We think it very inadvisable.  Jane, I was just saying
what a pleasant party you have asked us to meet.  You have a wonderful
power of selection.  It is quite a gift.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Dear Caroline, how kind of you!  I think we all do fit
in very nicely together.  And I hope our charming American visitor will
carry back pleasant recollections of our English country life.  [_To
Footman_.]  The cushion, there, Francis.  And my shawl.  The Shetland.
Get the Shetland.  [_Exit Footman for shawl_.]

[_Enter_ GERALD ARBUTHNOT.]

GERALD.  Lady Hunstanton, I have such good news to tell you.  Lord
Illingworth has just offered to make me his secretary.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  His secretary?  That is good news indeed, Gerald.  It
means a very brilliant future in store for you.  Your dear mother will be
delighted.  I really must try and induce her to come up here to-night.
Do you think she would, Gerald?  I know how difficult it is to get her to
go anywhere.

GERALD.  Oh!  I am sure she would, Lady Hunstanton, if she knew Lord
Illingworth had made me such an offer.

[_Enter Footman with shawl_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I will write and tell her about it, and ask her to come
up and meet him.  [_To Footman_.]  Just wait, Francis.  [_Writes
letter_.]

LADY CAROLINE.  That is a very wonderful opening for so young a man as
you are, Mr. Arbuthnot.

GERALD.  It is indeed, Lady Caroline.  I trust I shall be able to show
myself worthy of it.

LADY CAROLINE.  I trust so.

GERALD.  [_To_ HESTER.]  _You_ have not congratulated me yet, Miss
Worsley.

HESTER.  Are you very pleased about it?

GERALD.  Of course I am.  It means everything to me—things that were out
of the reach of hope before may be within hope’s reach now.

HESTER.  Nothing should be out of the reach of hope.  Life is a hope.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I fancy, Caroline, that Diplomacy is what Lord
Illingworth is aiming at.  I heard that he was offered Vienna.  But that
may not be true.

LADY CAROLINE.  I don’t think that England should be represented abroad
by an unmarried man, Jane.  It might lead to complications.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You are too nervous, Caroline.  Believe me, you are too
nervous.  Besides, Lord Illingworth may marry any day.  I was in hopes he
would have married lady Kelso.  But I believe he said her family was too
large.  Or was it her feet?  I forget which.  I regret it very much.  She
was made to be an ambassador’s wife.

LADY CAROLINE.  She certainly has a wonderful faculty of remembering
people’s names, and forgetting their faces.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Well, that is very natural, Caroline, is it not?  [_To
Footman_.]  Tell Henry to wait for an answer.  I have written a line to
your dear mother, Gerald, to tell her your good news, and to say she
really must come to dinner.

[_Exit Footman_.]

GERALD.  That is awfully kind of you, Lady Hunstanton.  [_To_ HESTER.]
Will you come for a stroll, Miss Worsley?

HESTER.  With pleasure.  [_Exit with_ GERALD.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I am very much gratified at Gerald Arbuthnot’s good
fortune.  He is quite a _protégé_ of mine.  And I am particularly pleased
that Lord Illingworth should have made the offer of his own accord
without my suggesting anything.  Nobody likes to be asked favours.  I
remember poor Charlotte Pagden making herself quite unpopular one season,
because she had a French governess she wanted to recommend to every one.

LADY CAROLINE.  I saw the governess, Jane.  Lady Pagden sent her to me.
It was before Eleanor came out.  She was far too good-looking to be in
any respectable household.  I don’t wonder Lady Pagden was so anxious to
get rid of her.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, that explains it.

LADY CAROLINE.  John, the grass is too damp for you.  You had better go
and put on your overshoes at once.

SIR JOHN.  I am quite comfortable, Caroline, I assure you.

LADY CAROLINE.  You must allow me to be the best judge of that, John.
Pray do as I tell you.

[SIR JOHN _gets up and goes off_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You spoil him, Caroline, you do indeed!

[_Enter_ MRS. ALLONBY _and_ LADY STUTFIELD.]

[_To_ MRS. ALLONBY.]  Well, dear, I hope you like the park.  It is said
to be well timbered.

MRS. ALLONBY.  The trees are wonderful, Lady Hunstanton.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Quite, quite wonderful.

MRS. ALLONBY.  But somehow, I feel sure that if I lived in the country
for six months, I should become so unsophisticated that no one would take
the slightest notice of me.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I assure you, dear, that the country has not that
effect at all.  Why, it was from Melthorpe, which is only two miles from
here, that Lady Belton eloped with Lord Fethersdale.  I remember the
occurrence perfectly.  Poor Lord Belton died three days afterwards of
joy, or gout.  I forget which.  We had a large party staying here at the
time, so we were all very much interested in the whole affair.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I think to elope is cowardly.  It’s running away from
danger.  And danger has become so rare in modern life.

LADY CAROLINE.  As far as I can make out, the young women of the present
day seem to make it the sole object of their lives to be always playing
with fire.

MRS. ALLONBY.  The one advantage of playing with fire, Lady Caroline, is
that one never gets even singed.  It is the people who don’t know how to
play with it who get burned up.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes; I see that.  It is very, very helpful.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I don’t know how the world would get on with such a
theory as that, dear Mrs. Allonby.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Ah!  The world was made for men and not for women.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh, don’t say that, Lady Stutfield.  We have a much better
time than they have.  There are far more things forbidden to us than are
forbidden to them.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes; that is quite, quite true.  I had not thought of
that.

[_Enter_ SIR JOHN _and_ MR. KELVIL.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Well, Mr. Kelvil, have you got through your work?

KELVIL.  I have finished my writing for the day, Lady Hunstanton.  It has
been an arduous task.  The demands on the time of a public man are very
heavy nowadays, very heavy indeed.  And I don’t think they meet with
adequate recognition.

LADY CAROLINE.  John, have you got your overshoes on?

SIR JOHN.  Yes, my love.

LADY CAROLINE.  I think you had better come over here, John.  It is more
sheltered.

SIR JOHN.  I am quite comfortable, Caroline.

LADY CAROLINE.  I think not, John.  You had better sit beside me.  [SIR
JOHN _rises and goes across_.]

LADY STUTFIELD.  And what have you been writing about this morning, Mr.
Kelvil?

KELVIL.  On the usual subject, Lady Stutfield.  On Purity.

LADY STUTFIELD.  That must be such a very, very interesting thing to
write about.

KELVIL.  It is the one subject of really national importance, nowadays,
Lady Stutfield.  I purpose addressing my constituents on the question
before Parliament meets.  I find that the poorer classes of this country
display a marked desire for a higher ethical standard.

LADY STUTFIELD.  How quite, quite nice of them.

LADY CAROLINE.  Are you in favour of women taking part in politics, Mr.
Kettle?

SIR JOHN.  Kelvil, my love, Kelvil.

KELVIL.  The growing influence of women is the one reassuring thing in
our political life, Lady Caroline.  Women are always on the side of
morality, public and private.

LADY STUTFIELD.  It is so very, very gratifying to hear you say that.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, yes!—the moral qualities in women—that is the
important thing.  I am afraid, Caroline, that dear Lord Illingworth
doesn’t value the moral qualities in women as much as he should.

[_Enter_ LORD ILLINGWORTH.]

LADY STUTFIELD.  The world says that Lord Illingworth is very, very
wicked.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  But what world says that, Lady Stutfield?  It must be
the next world.  This world and I are on excellent terms.  [_Sits down
beside_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

LADY STUTFIELD.  Every one _I_ know says you are very, very wicked.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is perfectly monstrous the way people go about,
nowadays, saying things against one behind one’s back that are absolutely
and entirely true.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Dear Lord Illingworth is quite hopeless, Lady
Stutfield.  I have given up trying to reform him.  It would take a Public
Company with a Board of Directors and a paid Secretary to do that.  But
you have the secretary already, Lord Illingworth, haven’t you?  Gerald
Arbuthnot has told us of his good fortune; it is really most kind of you.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Oh, don’t say that, Lady Hunstanton.  Kind is a
dreadful word.  I took a great fancy to young Arbuthnot the moment I met
him, and he’ll be of considerable use to me in something I am foolish
enough to think of doing.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  He is an admirable young man.  And his mother is one of
my dearest friends.  He has just gone for a walk with our pretty
American.  She is very pretty, is she not?

LADY CAROLINE.  Far too pretty.  These American girls carry off all the
good matches.  Why can’t they stay in their own country?  They are always
telling us it is the Paradise of women.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is, Lady Caroline.  That is why, like Eve, they are
so extremely anxious to get out of it.

LADY CAROLINE.  Who are Miss Worsley’s parents?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  American women are wonderfully clever in concealing
their parents.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear Lord Illingworth, what do you mean?  Miss
Worsley, Caroline, is an orphan.  Her father was a very wealthy
millionaire or philanthropist, or both, I believe, who entertained my son
quite hospitably, when he visited Boston.  I don’t know how he made his
money, originally.

KELVIL.  I fancy in American dry goods.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  What are American dry goods?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  American novels.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  How very singular! . . . Well, from whatever source her
large fortune came, I have a great esteem for Miss Worsley.  She dresses
exceedingly well.  All Americans do dress well.  They get their clothes
in Paris.

MRS. ALLONBY.  They say, Lady Hunstanton, that when good Americans die
they go to Paris.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Indeed?  And when bad Americans die, where do they go
to?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Oh, they go to America.

KELVIL.  I am afraid you don’t appreciate America, Lord Illingworth.  It
is a very remarkable country, especially considering its youth.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  The youth of America is their oldest tradition.  It
has been going on now for three hundred years.  To hear them talk one
would imagine they were in their first childhood.  As far as civilisation
goes they are in their second.

KELVIL.  There is undoubtedly a great deal of corruption in American
politics.  I suppose you allude to that?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I wonder.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Politics are in a sad way everywhere, I am told.  They
certainly are in England.  Dear Mr. Cardew is ruining the country.  I
wonder Mrs. Cardew allows him.  I am sure, Lord Illingworth, you don’t
think that uneducated people should be allowed to have votes?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I think they are the only people who should.

KELVIL.  Do you take no side then in modern politics, Lord Illingworth?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  One should never take sides in anything, Mr. Kelvil.
Taking sides is the beginning of sincerity, and earnestness follows
shortly afterwards, and the human being becomes a bore.  However, the
House of Commons really does very little harm.  You can’t make people
good by Act of Parliament,—that is something.

KELVIL.  You cannot deny that the House of Commons has always shown great
sympathy with the sufferings of the poor.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  That is its special vice.  That is the special vice of
the age.  One should sympathise with the joy, the beauty, the colour of
life.  The less said about life’s sores the better, Mr. Kelvil.

KELVIL.  Still our East End is a very important problem.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Quite so.  It is the problem of slavery.  And we are
trying to solve it by amusing the slaves.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Certainly, a great deal may be done by means of cheap
entertainments, as you say, Lord Illingworth.  Dear Dr. Daubeny, our
rector here, provides, with the assistance of his curates, really
admirable recreations for the poor during the winter.  And much good may
be done by means of a magic lantern, or a missionary, or some popular
amusement of that kind.

LADY CAROLINE.  I am not at all in favour of amusements for the poor,
Jane.  Blankets and coals are sufficient.  There is too much love of
pleasure amongst the upper classes as it is.  Health is what we want in
modern life.  The tone is not healthy, not healthy at all.

KELVIL.  You are quite right, Lady Caroline.

LADY CAROLINE.  I believe I am usually right.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Horrid word ‘health.’

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Silliest word in our language, and one knows so well
the popular idea of health.  The English country gentleman galloping
after a fox—the unspeakable in full pursuit of the uneatable.

KELVIL.  May I ask, Lord Illingworth, if you regard the House of Lords as
a better institution than the House of Commons?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  A much better institution, of course.  We in the House
of Lords are never in touch with public opinion.  That makes us a
civilised body.

KELVIL.  Are you serious in putting forward such a view?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Quite serious, Mr. Kelvil.  [_To_ MRS. ALLONBY.]
Vulgar habit that is people have nowadays of asking one, after one has
given them an idea, whether one is serious or not.  Nothing is serious
except passion.  The intellect is not a serious thing, and never has
been.  It is an instrument on which one plays, that is all.  The only
serious form of intellect I know is the British intellect.  And on the
British intellect the illiterates play the drum.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  What are you saying, Lord Illingworth, about the drum?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I was merely talking to Mrs. Allonby about the leading
articles in the London newspapers.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  But do you believe all that is written in the
newspapers?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I do.  Nowadays it is only the unreadable that occurs.
[_Rises with_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Are you going, Mrs. Allonby?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Just as far as the conservatory.  Lord Illingworth told me
this morning that there was an orchid there as beautiful as the seven
deadly sins.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear, I hope there is nothing of the kind.  I will
certainly speak to the gardener.

[_Exit_ MRS. ALLONBY _and_ LORD ILLINGWORTH.]

LADY CAROLINE.  Remarkable type, Mrs. Allonby.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  She lets her clever tongue run away with her sometimes.

LADY CAROLINE.  Is that the only thing, Jane, Mrs. Allonby allows to run
away with her?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I hope so, Caroline, I am sure.

[_Enter_ LORD ALFRED.]

Dear Lord Alfred, do join us.  [LORD ALFRED _sits down beside_ LADY
STUTFIELD.]

LADY CAROLINE.  You believe good of every one, Jane.  It is a great
fault.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Do you really, really think, Lady Caroline, that one
should believe evil of every one?

LADY CAROLINE.  I think it is much safer to do so, Lady Stutfield.
Until, of course, people are found out to be good.  But that requires a
great deal of investigation nowadays.

LADY STUTFIELD.  But there is so much unkind scandal in modern life.

LADY CAROLINE.  Lord Illingworth remarked to me last night at dinner that
the basis of every scandal is an absolutely immoral certainty.

KELVIL.  Lord Illingworth is, of course, a very brilliant man, but he
seems to me to be lacking in that fine faith in the nobility and purity
of life which is so important in this century.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes, quite, quite important, is it not?

KELVIL.  He gives me the impression of a man who does not appreciate the
beauty of our English home-life.  I would say that he was tainted with
foreign ideas on the subject.

LADY STUTFIELD.  There is nothing, nothing like the beauty of home-life,
is there?

KELVIL.  It is the mainstay of our moral system in England, Lady
Stutfield.  Without it we would become like our neighbours.

LADY STUTFIELD.  That would be so, so sad, would it not?

KELVIL.  I am afraid, too, that Lord Illingworth regards woman simply as
a toy.  Now, I have never regarded woman as a toy.  Woman is the
intellectual helpmeet of man in public as in private life.  Without her
we should forget the true ideals.  [_Sits down beside_ LADY STUTFIELD.]

LADY STUTFIELD.  I am so very, very glad to hear you say that.

LADY CAROLINE.  You a married man, Mr. Kettle?

SIR JOHN.  Kelvil, dear, Kelvil.

KELVIL.  I am married, Lady Caroline.

LADY CAROLINE.  Family?

KELVIL.  Yes.

LADY CAROLINE.  How many?

KELVIL.  Eight.

[LADY STUTFIELD _turns her attention to_ LORD ALFRED.]

LADY CAROLINE.  Mrs. Kettle and the children are, I suppose, at the
seaside?  [SIR JOHN _shrugs his shoulders_.]

KELVIL.  My wife is at the seaside with the children, Lady Caroline.

LADY CAROLINE.  You will join them later on, no doubt?

KELVIL.  If my public engagements permit me.

LADY CAROLINE.  Your public life must be a great source of gratification
to Mrs. Kettle.

SIR JOHN.  Kelvil, my love, Kelvil.

LADY STUTFIELD.  [_To_ LORD ALFRED.]  How very, very charming those
gold-tipped cigarettes of yours are, Lord Alfred.

LORD ALFRED.  They are awfully expensive.  I can only afford them when
I’m in debt.

LADY STUTFIELD.  It must be terribly, terribly distressing to be in debt.

LORD ALFRED.  One must have some occupation nowadays.  If I hadn’t my
debts I shouldn’t have anything to think about.  All the chaps I know are
in debt.

LADY STUTFIELD.  But don’t the people to whom you owe the money give you
a great, great deal of annoyance?

[_Enter Footman_.]

LORD ALFRED.  Oh, no, they write; I don’t.

LADY STUTFIELD.  How very, very strange.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, here is a letter, Caroline, from dear Mrs.
Arbuthnot.  She won’t dine.  I am so sorry.  But she will come in the
evening.  I am very pleased indeed.  She is one of the sweetest of women.
Writes a beautiful hand, too, so large, so firm.  [_Hands letter to_ LADY
CAROLINE.]

LADY CAROLINE.  [_Looking at it_.]  A little lacking in femininity, Jane.
Femininity is the quality I admire most in women.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_Taking back letter and leaving it on table_.]  Oh!
she is very feminine, Caroline, and so good too.  You should hear what
the Archdeacon says of her.  He regards her as his right hand in the
parish.  [_Footman speaks to her_.]  In the Yellow Drawing-room.  Shall
we all go in?  Lady Stutfield, shall we go in to tea?

LADY STUTFIELD.  With pleasure, Lady Hunstanton.  [_They rise and proceed
to go off_.  SIR JOHN offers to carry LADY STUTFIELD’S cloak.]

LADY CAROLINE.  John!  If you would allow your nephew to look after Lady
Stutfield’s cloak, you might help me with my workbasket.

[_Enter_ LORD ILLINGWORTH _and_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

SIR JOHN.  Certainly, my love.  [_Exeunt_.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  Curious thing, plain women are always jealous of their
husbands, beautiful women never are!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Beautiful women never have time.  They are always so
occupied in being jealous of other people’s husbands.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I should have thought Lady Caroline would have grown tired
of conjugal anxiety by this time!  Sir John is her fourth!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  So much marriage is certainly not becoming.  Twenty
years of romance make a woman look like a ruin; but twenty years of
marriage make her something like a public building.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Twenty years of romance!  Is there such a thing?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Not in our day.  Women have become too brilliant.
Nothing spoils a romance so much as a sense of humour in the woman.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Or the want of it in the man.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You are quite right.  In a Temple every one should be
serious, except the thing that is worshipped.

MRS. ALLONBY.  And that should be man?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Women kneel so gracefully; men don’t.

MRS. ALLONBY.  You are thinking of Lady Stutfield!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I assure you I have not thought of Lady Stutfield for
the last quarter of an hour.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Is she such a mystery?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  She is more than a mystery—she is a mood.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Moods don’t last.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is their chief charm.

[_Enter_ HESTER _and_ GERALD.]

GERALD.  Lord Illingworth, every one has been congratulating me, Lady
Hunstanton and Lady Caroline, and . . . every one.  I hope I shall make a
good secretary.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You will be the pattern secretary, Gerald.  [_Talks to
him_.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  You enjoy country life, Miss Worsley?

HESTER.  Very much indeed.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Don’t find yourself longing for a London dinner-party?

HESTER.  I dislike London dinner-parties.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I adore them.  The clever people never listen, and the
stupid people never talk.

HESTER.  I think the stupid people talk a great deal.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, I never listen!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  My dear boy, if I didn’t like you I wouldn’t have made
you the offer.  It is because I like you so much that I want to have you
with me.

[_Exit_ HESTER _with_ GERALD.]

Charming fellow, Gerald Arbuthnot!

MRS. ALLONBY.  He is very nice; very nice indeed.  But I can’t stand the
American young lady.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Why?

MRS. ALLONBY.  She told me yesterday, and in quite a loud voice too, that
she was only eighteen.  It was most annoying.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  One should never trust a woman who tells one her real
age.  A woman who would tell one that, would tell one anything.

MRS. ALLONBY.  She is a Puritan besides—

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Ah, that is inexcusable.  I don’t mind plain women
being Puritans.  It is the only excuse they have for being plain.  But
she is decidedly pretty.  I admire her immensely.  [_Looks steadfastly
at_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  What a thoroughly bad man you must be!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What do you call a bad man?

MRS. ALLONBY.  The sort of man who admires innocence.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  And a bad woman?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh! the sort of woman a man never gets tired of.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You are severe—on yourself.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Define us as a sex.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Sphinxes without secrets.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Does that include the Puritan women?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Do you know, I don’t believe in the existence of
Puritan women?  I don’t think there is a woman in the world who would not
be a little flattered if one made love to her.  It is that which makes
women so irresistibly adorable.

MRS. ALLONBY.  You think there is no woman in the world who would object
to being kissed?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Very few.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Miss Worsley would not let you kiss her.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Are you sure?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Quite.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What do you think she’d do if I kissed her?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Either marry you, or strike you across the face with her
glove.  What would you do if she struck you across the face with her
glove?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Fall in love with her, probably.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Then it is lucky you are not going to kiss her!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Is that a challenge?

MRS. ALLONBY.  It is an arrow shot into the air.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Don’t you know that I always succeed in whatever I
try?

MRS. ALLONBY.  I am sorry to hear it.  We women adore failures.  They
lean on us.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You worship successes.  You cling to them.

MRS. ALLONBY.  We are the laurels to hide their baldness.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  And they need you always, except at the moment of
triumph.

MRS. ALLONBY.  They are uninteresting then.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  How tantalising you are!  [_A pause_.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  Lord Illingworth, there is one thing I shall always like
you for.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Only one thing?  And I have so many bad qualities.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, don’t be too conceited about them.  You may lose them
as you grow old.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I never intend to grow old.  The soul is born old but
grows young.  That is the comedy of life.

MRS. ALLONBY.  And the body is born young and grows old.  That is life’s
tragedy.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Its comedy also, sometimes.  But what is the
mysterious reason why you will always like me?

MRS. ALLONBY.  It is that you have never made love to me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I have never done anything else.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Really?  I have not noticed it.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  How fortunate!  It might have been a tragedy for both
of us.

MRS. ALLONBY.  We should each have survived.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  One can survive everything nowadays, except death, and
live down anything except a good reputation.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Have you tried a good reputation?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is one of the many annoyances to which I have never
been subjected.

MRS. ALLONBY.  It may come.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Why do you threaten me?

MRS. ALLONBY.  I will tell you when you have kissed the Puritan.

[_Enter Footman_.]

FRANCIS.  Tea is served in the Yellow Drawing-room, my lord.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Tell her ladyship we are coming in.

FRANCIS.  Yes, my lord.

[_Exit_.]

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Shall we go in to tea?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Do you like such simple pleasures?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I adore simple pleasures.  They are the last refuge of
the complex.  But, if you wish, let us stay here.  Yes, let us stay here.
The Book of Life begins with a man and a woman in a garden.

MRS. ALLONBY.  It ends with Revelations.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You fence divinely.  But the button has come of your
foil.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I have still the mask.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It makes your eyes lovelier.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Thank you.  Come.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  [_Sees_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT’S _letter on table_, _and takes
it up and looks at envelope_.]  What a curious handwriting!  It reminds
me of the handwriting of a woman I used to know years ago.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Who?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Oh! no one.  No one in particular.  A woman of no
importance.  [_Throws letter down_, _and passes up the steps of the
terrace with_ MRS. ALLONBY.  _They smile at each other_.]

                                ACT DROP.




SECOND ACT


                                  SCENE

 _Drawing-room at Hunstanton_, _after dinner_, _lamps lit_.  _Door_ L.C.
                               _Door_ R.C.

[_Ladies seated on sofas_.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  What a comfort it is to have got rid of the men for a
little!

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes; men persecute us dreadfully, don’t they?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Persecute us?  I wish they did.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear!

MRS. ALLONBY.  The annoying thing is that the wretches can be perfectly
happy without us.  That is why I think it is every woman’s duty never to
leave them alone for a single moment, except during this short breathing
space after dinner; without which I believe we poor women would be
absolutely worn to shadows.

[_Enter Servants with coffee_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Worn to shadows, dear?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Yes, Lady Hunstanton.  It is such a strain keeping men up
to the mark.  They are always trying to escape from us.

LADY STUTFIELD.  It seems to me that it is we who are always trying to
escape from them.  Men are so very, very heartless.  They know their
power and use it.

LADY CAROLINE.  [_Takes coffee from Servant_.]  What stuff and nonsense
all this about men is!  The thing to do is to keep men in their proper
place.

MRS. ALLONBY.  But what is their proper place, Lady Caroline?

LADY CAROLINE.  Looking after their wives, Mrs. Allonby.

MRS. ALLONBY.  [_Takes coffee from Servant_.]  Really?  And if they’re
not married?

LADY CAROLINE.  If they are not married, they should be looking after a
wife.  It’s perfectly scandalous the amount of bachelors who are going
about society.  There should be a law passed to compel them all to marry
within twelve months.

LADY STUTFIELD.  [_Refuses coffee_.]  But if they’re in love with some
one who, perhaps, is tied to another?

LADY CAROLINE.  In that case, Lady Stutfield, they should be married off
in a week to some plain respectable girl, in order to teach them not to
meddle with other people’s property.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I don’t think that we should ever be spoken of as other
people’s property.  All men are married women’s property.  That is the
only true definition of what married women’s property really is.  But we
don’t belong to any one.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Oh, I am so very, very glad to hear you say so.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  But do you really think, dear Caroline, that
legislation would improve matters in any way?  I am told that, nowadays,
all the married men live like bachelors, and all the bachelors like
married men.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I certainly never know one from the other.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Oh, I think one can always know at once whether a man
has home claims upon his life or not.  I have noticed a very, very sad
expression in the eyes of so many married men.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, all that I have noticed is that they are horribly
tedious when they are good husbands, and abominably conceited when they
are not.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Well, I suppose the type of husband has completely
changed since my young days, but I’m bound to state that poor dear
Hunstanton was the most delightful of creatures, and as good as gold.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, my husband is a sort of promissory note; I’m tired of
meeting him.

LADY CAROLINE.  But you renew him from time to time, don’t you?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh no, Lady Caroline.  I have only had one husband as yet.
I suppose you look upon me as quite an amateur.

LADY CAROLINE.  With your views on life I wonder you married at all.

MRS. ALLONBY.  So do I.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear child, I believe you are really very happy in
your married life, but that you like to hide your happiness from others.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I assure you I was horribly deceived in Ernest.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Oh, I hope not, dear.  I knew his mother quite well.
She was a Stratton, Caroline, one of Lord Crowland’s daughters.

LADY CAROLINE.  Victoria Stratton?  I remember her perfectly.  A silly
fair-haired woman with no chin.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, Ernest has a chin.  He has a very strong chin, a
square chin.  Ernest’s chin is far too square.

LADY STUTFIELD.  But do you really think a man’s chin can be too square?
I think a man should look very, very strong, and that his chin should be
quite, quite square.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Then you should certainly know Ernest, Lady Stutfield.  It
is only fair to tell you beforehand he has got no conversation at all.

LADY STUTFIELD.  I adore silent men.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh, Ernest isn’t silent.  He talks the whole time.  But he
has got no conversation.  What he talks about I don’t know.  I haven’t
listened to him for years.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Have you never forgiven him then?  How sad that seems!
But all life is very, very sad, is it not?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Life, Lady Stutfield, is simply a _mauvais quart d’heure_
made up of exquisite moments.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes, there are moments, certainly.  But was it something
very, very wrong that Mr. Allonby did?  Did he become angry with you, and
say anything that was unkind or true?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh dear, no.  Ernest is invariably calm.  That is one of
the reasons he always gets on my nerves.  Nothing is so aggravating as
calmness.  There is something positively brutal about the good temper of
most modern men.  I wonder we women stand it as well as we do.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes; men’s good temper shows they are not so sensitive
as we are, not so finely strung.  It makes a great barrier often between
husband and wife, does it not?  But I would so much like to know what was
the wrong thing Mr. Allonby did.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Well, I will tell you, if you solemnly promise to tell
everybody else.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Thank you, thank you.  I will make a point of repeating
it.

MRS. ALLONBY.  When Ernest and I were engaged, he swore to me positively
on his knees that he had never loved any one before in the whole course
of his life.  I was very young at the time, so I didn’t believe him, I
needn’t tell you.  Unfortunately, however, I made no enquiries of any
kind till after I had been actually married four or five months.  I found
out then that what he had told me was perfectly true.  And that sort of
thing makes a man so absolutely uninteresting.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear!

MRS. ALLONBY.  Men always want to be a woman’s first love.  That is their
clumsy vanity.  We women have a more subtle instinct about things.  What
we like is to be a man’s last romance.

LADY STUTFIELD.  I see what you mean.  It’s very, very beautiful.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear child, you don’t mean to tell me that you won’t
forgive your husband because he never loved any one else?  Did you ever
hear such a thing, Caroline?  I am quite surprised.

LADY CAROLINE.  Oh, women have become so highly educated, Jane, that
nothing should surprise us nowadays, except happy marriages.  They
apparently are getting remarkably rare.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh, they’re quite out of date.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Except amongst the middle classes, I have been told.

MRS. ALLONBY.  How like the middle classes!

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes—is it not?—very, very like them.

LADY CAROLINE.  If what you tell us about the middle classes is true,
Lady Stutfield, it redounds greatly to their credit.  It is much to be
regretted that in our rank of life the wife should be so persistently
frivolous, under the impression apparently that it is the proper thing to
be.  It is to that I attribute the unhappiness of so many marriages we
all know of in society.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Do you know, Lady Caroline, I don’t think the frivolity of
the wife has ever anything to do with it. More marriages are ruined
nowadays by the common sense of the husband than by anything else.  How
can a woman be expected to be happy with a man who insists on treating
her as if she were a perfectly rational being?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear!

MRS. ALLONBY.  Man, poor, awkward, reliable, necessary man belongs to a
sex that has been rational for millions and millions of years.  He can’t
help himself.  It is in his race.  The History of Woman is very
different.  We have always been picturesque protests against the mere
existence of common sense.  We saw its dangers from the first.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes, the common sense of husbands is certainly most,
most trying.  Do tell me your conception of the Ideal Husband.  I think
it would be so very, very helpful.

MRS. ALLONBY.  The Ideal Husband?  There couldn’t be such a thing.  The
institution is wrong.

LADY STUTFIELD.  The Ideal Man, then, in his relations to _us_.

LADY CAROLINE.  He would probably be extremely realistic.

MRS. CAROLINE.  The Ideal Man!  Oh, the Ideal Man should talk to us as if
we were goddesses, and treat us as if we were children.  He should refuse
all our serious requests, and gratify every one of our whims.  He should
encourage us to have caprices, and forbid us to have missions.  He should
always say much more than he means, and always mean much more than he
says.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  But how could he do both, dear?

MRS. ALLONBY.  He should never run down other pretty women.  That would
show he had no taste, or make one suspect that he had too much.  No; he
should be nice about them all, but say that somehow they don’t attract
him.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes, that is always very, very pleasant to hear about
other women.

MRS. ALLONBY.  If we ask him a question about anything, he should give us
an answer all about ourselves.  He should invariably praise us for
whatever qualities he knows we haven’t got.  But he should be pitiless,
quite pitiless, in reproaching us for the virtues that we have never
dreamed of possessing.  He should never believe that we know the use of
useful things.  That would be unforgiveable.  But he should shower on us
everything we don’t want.

LADY CAROLINE.  As far as I can see, he is to do nothing but pay bills
and compliments.

MRS. ALLONBY.  He should persistently compromise us in public, and treat
us with absolute respect when we are alone.  And yet he should be always
ready to have a perfectly terrible scene, whenever we want one, and to
become miserable, absolutely miserable, at a moment’s notice, and to
overwhelm us with just reproaches in less than twenty minutes, and to be
positively violent at the end of half an hour, and to leave us for ever
at a quarter to eight, when we have to go and dress for dinner.  And
when, after that, one has seen him for really the last time, and he has
refused to take back the little things he has given one, and promised
never to communicate with one again, or to write one any foolish letters,
he should be perfectly broken-hearted, and telegraph to one all day long,
and send one little notes every half-hour by a private hansom, and dine
quite alone at the club, so that every one should know how unhappy he
was.  And after a whole dreadful week, during which one has gone about
everywhere with one’s husband, just to show how absolutely lonely one
was, he may be given a third last parting, in the evening, and then, if
his conduct has been quite irreproachable, and one has behaved really
badly to him, he should be allowed to admit that he has been entirely in
the wrong, and when he has admitted that, it becomes a woman’s duty to
forgive, and one can do it all over again from the beginning, with
variations.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  How clever you are, my dear!  You never mean a single
word you say.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Thank you, thank you.  It has been quite, quite
entrancing.  I must try and remember it all.  There are such a number of
details that are so very, very important.

LADY CAROLINE.  But you have not told us yet what the reward of the Ideal
Man is to be.

MRS. ALLONBY.  His reward?  Oh, infinite expectation.  That is quite
enough for him.

LADY STUTFIELD.  But men are so terribly, terribly exacting, are they
not?

MRS. ALLONBY.  That makes no matter.  One should never surrender.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Not even to the Ideal Man?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Certainly not to him.  Unless, of course, one wants to
grow tired of him.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Oh! . . . yes.  I see that.  It is very, very helpful.
Do you think, Mrs. Allonby, I shall ever meet the Ideal Man?  Or are
there more than one?

MRS. ALLONBY.  There are just four in London, Lady Stutfield.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Oh, my dear!

MRS. ALLONBY.  [_Going over to her_.]  What has happened?  Do tell me.

LADY HUNSTANTON [_in a low voice_]  I had completely forgotten that the
American young lady has been in the room all the time.  I am afraid some
of this clever talk may have shocked her a little.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, that will do her so much good!

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Let us hope she didn’t understand much.  I think I had
better go over and talk to her.  [_Rises and goes across to_ HESTER
WORSLEY.]  Well, dear Miss Worsley. [_Sitting down beside her_.]  How
quiet you have been in your nice little corner all this time!  I suppose
you have been reading a book?  There are so many books here in the
library.

HESTER.  No, I have been listening to the conversation.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You mustn’t believe everything that was said, you know,
dear.

HESTER.  I didn’t believe any of it

LADY HUNSTANTON.  That is quite right, dear.

HESTER.  [_Continuing_.]  I couldn’t believe that any women could really
hold such views of life as I have heard to-night from some of your
guests.  [_An awkward pause_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I hear you have such pleasant society in America.
Quite like our own in places, my son wrote to me.

HESTER.  There are cliques in America as elsewhere, Lady Hunstanton.  But
true American society consists simply of all the good women and good men
we have in our country.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  What a sensible system, and I dare say quite pleasant
too.  I am afraid in England we have too many artificial social barriers.
We don’t see as much as we should of the middle and lower classes.

HESTER.  In America we have no lower classes.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Really?  What a very strange arrangement!

MRS. ALLONBY.  What is that dreadful girl talking about?

LADY STUTFIELD.  She is painfully natural, is she not?

LADY CAROLINE.  There are a great many things you haven’t got in America,
I am told, Miss Worsley.  They say you have no ruins, and no curiosities.

MRS. ALLONBY.  [_To_ LADY STUTFIELD.]  What nonsense!  They have their
mothers and their manners.

HESTER.  The English aristocracy supply us with our curiosities, Lady
Caroline.  They are sent over to us every summer, regularly, in the
steamers, and propose to us the day after they land.  As for ruins, we
are trying to build up something that will last longer than brick or
stone.  [_Gets up to take her fan from table_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  What is that, dear?  Ah, yes, an iron Exhibition, is it
not, at that place that has the curious name?

HESTER.  [_Standing by table_.]  We are trying to build up life, Lady
Hunstanton, on a better, truer, purer basis than life rests on here.
This sounds strange to you all, no doubt.  How could it sound other than
strange?  You rich people in England, you don’t know how you are living.
How could you know?  You shut out from your society the gentle and the
good.  You laugh at the simple and the pure.  Living, as you all do, on
others and by them, you sneer at self-sacrifice, and if you throw bread
to the poor, it is merely to keep them quiet for a season.  With all your
pomp and wealth and art you don’t know how to live—you don’t even know
that.  You love the beauty that you can see and touch and handle, the
beauty that you can destroy, and do destroy, but of the unseen beauty of
life, of the unseen beauty of a higher life, you know nothing.  You have
lost life’s secret.  Oh, your English society seems to me shallow,
selfish, foolish.  It has blinded its eyes, and stopped its ears.  It
lies like a leper in purple.  It sits like a dead thing smeared with
gold.  It is all wrong, all wrong.

LADY STUTFIELD.  I don’t think one should know of these things.  It is
not very, very nice, is it?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear Miss Worsley, I thought you liked English
society so much.  You were such a success in it.  And you were so much
admired by the best people.  I quite forget what Lord Henry Weston said
of you—but it was most complimentary, and you know what an authority he
is on beauty.

HESTER.  Lord Henry Weston!  I remember him, Lady Hunstanton.  A man with
a hideous smile and a hideous past.  He is asked everywhere.  No
dinner-party is complete without him.  What of those whose ruin is due to
him?  They are outcasts.  They are nameless.  If you met them in the
street you would turn your head away.  I don’t complain of their
punishment.  Let all women who have sinned be punished.

[MRS. ARBUTHNOT _enters from terrace behind in a cloak with a lace veil
over her head_.  _She hears the last words and starts_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear young lady!

HESTER.  It is right that they should be punished, but don’t let them be
the only ones to suffer.  If a man and woman have sinned, let them both
go forth into the desert to love or loathe each other there.  Let them
both be branded.  Set a mark, if you wish, on each, but don’t punish the
one and let the other go free.  Don’t have one law for men and another
for women.  You are unjust to women in England.  And till you count what
is a shame in a woman to be an infamy in a man, you will always be
unjust, and Right, that pillar of fire, and Wrong, that pillar of cloud,
will be made dim to your eyes, or be not seen at all, or if seen, not
regarded.

LADY CAROLINE.  Might I, dear Miss Worsley, as you are standing up, ask
you for my cotton that is just behind you?  Thank you.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear Mrs. Arbuthnot!  I am so pleased you have come
up.  But I didn’t hear you announced.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh, I came straight in from the terrace, Lady Hunstanton,
just as I was.  You didn’t tell me you had a party.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Not a party.  Only a few guests who are staying in the
house, and whom you must know.  Allow me.  [_Tries to help her_.  _Rings
bell_.]  Caroline, this is Mrs. Arbuthnot, one of my sweetest friends.
Lady Caroline Pontefract, Lady Stutfield, Mrs. Allonby, and my young
American friend, Miss Worsley, who has just been telling us all how
wicked we are.

HESTER.  I am afraid you think I spoke too strongly, Lady Hunstanton.
But there are some things in England—

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear young lady, there was a great deal of truth, I
dare say, in what you said, and you looked very pretty while you said it,
which is much more important, Lord Illingworth would tell us.  The only
point where I thought you were a little hard was about Lady Caroline’s
brother, about poor Lord Henry.  He is really such good company.

[_Enter Footman_.]

Take Mrs. Arbuthnot’s things.

[_Exit Footman with wraps_.]

HESTER.  Lady Caroline, I had no idea it was your brother.  I am sorry
for the pain I must have caused you—I—

LADY CAROLINE.  My dear Miss Worsley, the only part of your little
speech, if I may so term it, with which I thoroughly agreed, was the part
about my brother.  Nothing that you could possibly say could be too bad
for him.  I regard Henry as infamous, absolutely infamous.  But I am
bound to state, as you were remarking, Jane, that he is excellent
company, and he has one of the best cooks in London, and after a good
dinner one can forgive anybody, even one’s own relations.

LADY HUNSTANTON [_to_ MISS WORSLEY]  Now, do come, dear, and make friends
with Mrs. Arbuthnot.  She is one of the good, sweet, simple people you
told us we never admitted into society.  I am sorry to say Mrs. Arbuthnot
comes very rarely to me.  But that is not my fault.

MRS. ALLONBY.  What a bore it is the men staying so long after dinner!  I
expect they are saying the most dreadful things about us.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Do you really think so?

MRS. ALLONBY.  I was sure of it.

LADY STUTFIELD.  How very, very horrid of them!  Shall we go onto the
terrace?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh, anything to get away from the dowagers and the
dowdies.  [_Rises and goes with_ LADY STUTFIELD _to door_ L.C.]  We are
only going to look at the stars, Lady Hunstanton.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You will find a great many, dear, a great many.  But
don’t catch cold.  [_To_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]  We shall all miss Gerald so
much, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  But has Lord Illingworth really offered to make Gerald
his secretary?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Oh, yes!  He has been most charming about it.  He has
the highest possible opinion of your boy.  You don’t know Lord
Illingworth, I believe, dear.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I have never met him.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You know him by name, no doubt?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I am afraid I don’t.  I live so much out of the world,
and see so few people.  I remember hearing years ago of an old Lord
Illingworth who lived in Yorkshire, I think.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, yes.  That would be the last Earl but one.  He was
a very curious man.  He wanted to marry beneath him.  Or wouldn’t, I
believe.  There was some scandal about it.  The present Lord Illingworth
is quite different.  He is very distinguished.  He does—well, he does
nothing, which I am afraid our pretty American visitor here thinks very
wrong of anybody, and I don’t know that he cares much for the subjects in
which you are so interested, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot.  Do you think,
Caroline, that Lord Illingworth is interested in the Housing of the Poor?

LADY CAROLINE.  I should fancy not at all, Jane.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  We all have our different tastes, have we not?  But
Lord Illingworth has a very high position, and there is nothing he
couldn’t get if he chose to ask for it.  Of course, he is comparatively a
young man still, and he has only come to his title within—how long
exactly is it, Caroline, since Lord Illingworth succeeded?

LADY CAROLINE.  About four years, I think, Jane.  I know it was the same
year in which my brother had his last exposure in the evening newspapers.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, I remember.  That would be about four years ago.
Of course, there were a great many people between the present Lord
Illingworth and the title, Mrs. Arbuthnot.  There was—who was there,
Caroline?

LADY CAROLINE.  There was poor Margaret’s baby.  You remember how anxious
she was to have a boy, and it was a boy, but it died, and her husband
died shortly afterwards, and she married almost immediately one of Lord
Ascot’s sons, who, I am told, beats her.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, that is in the family, dear, that is in the family.
And there was also, I remember, a clergyman who wanted to be a lunatic,
or a lunatic who wanted to be a clergyman, I forget which, but I know the
Court of Chancery investigated the matter, and decided that he was quite
sane.  And I saw him afterwards at poor Lord Plumstead’s with straws in
his hair, or something very odd about him.  I can’t recall what.  I often
regret, Lady Caroline, that dear Lady Cecilia never lived to see her son
get the title.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Lady Cecilia?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Lord Illingworth’s mother, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot, was one
of the Duchess of Jerningham’s pretty daughters, and she married Sir
Thomas Harford, who wasn’t considered a very good match for her at the
time, though he was said to be the handsomest man in London.  I knew them
all quite intimately, and both the sons, Arthur and George.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It was the eldest son who succeeded, of course, Lady
Hunstanton?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  No, dear, he was killed in the hunting field.  Or was
it fishing, Caroline?  I forget.  But George came in for everything.  I
always tell him that no younger son has ever had such good luck as he has
had.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Lady Hunstanton, I want to speak to Gerald at once.
Might I see him?  Can he be sent for?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Certainly, dear.  I will send one of the servants into
the dining-room to fetch him.  I don’t know what keeps the gentlemen so
long.  [_Rings bell_.]  When I knew Lord Illingworth first as plain
George Harford, he was simply a very brilliant young man about town, with
not a penny of money except what poor dear Lady Cecilia gave him.  She
was quite devoted to him.  Chiefly, I fancy, because he was on bad terms
with his father.  Oh, here is the dear Archdeacon.  [_To Servant_.]  It
doesn’t matter.

[_Enter_ SIR JOHN _and_ DOCTOR DAUBENY.  SIR JOHN _goes over to_ LADY
STUTFIELD, DOCTOR DAUBENY _to_ LADY HUNSTANTON.]

THE ARCHDEACON.  Lord Illingworth has been most entertaining.  I have
never enjoyed myself more.  [_Sees_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]  Ah, Mrs. Arbuthnot.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_To_ DOCTOR BAUBENY.]  You see I have got Mrs.
Arbuthnot to come to me at last.

THE ARCHDEACON.  That is a great honour, Lady Hunstanton.  Mrs. Daubeny
will be quite jealous of you.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, I am so sorry Mrs. Daubeny could not come with you
to-night.  Headache as usual, I suppose.

THE ARCHDEACON.  Yes, Lady Hunstanton; a perfect martyr.  But she is
happiest alone.  She is happiest alone.

LADY CAROLINE.  [_To her husband_.]  John!  [SIR JOHN _goes over to his
wife_.  DOCTOR BAUBENY _talks to_ LADY HUNSTANTON _and_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]

[MRS. ARBUTHNOT watches LORD ILLINGWORTH the whole time.  He has passed
across the room without noticing her, and approaches MRS. ALLONBY, who
with LADY STUTFIELD is standing by the door looking on to the terrace.]

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  How is the most charming woman in the world?

MRS. ALLONBY.  [Taking LADY STUTFIELD by the hand.]  We are both quite
well, thank you, Lord Illingworth.  But what a short time you have been
in the dining-room!  It seems as if we had only just left.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I was bored to death.  Never opened my lips the whole
time.  Absolutely longing to come in to you.

MRS. ALLONBY.  You should have.  The American girl has been giving us a
lecture.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Really?  All Americans lecture, I believe.  I suppose
it is something in their climate.  What did she lecture about?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh, Puritanism, of course.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I am going to convert her, am I not?  How long do you
give me?

MRS. ALLONBY.  A week.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  A week is more than enough.

[_Enter_ GERALD _and_ LORD ALFRED.]

GERALD.  [_Going to_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]  Dear mother!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald, I don’t feel at all well.  See me home, Gerald.
I shouldn’t have come.

GERALD.  I am so sorry, mother.  Certainly.  But you must know Lord
Illingworth first.  [_Goes across room_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Not to-night, Gerald.

GERALD.  Lord Illingworth, I want you so much to know my mother.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  With the greatest pleasure.  [_To_ MRS. ALLONBY.]
I’ll be back in a moment.  People’s mothers always bore me to death.  All
women become like their mothers.  That is their tragedy.

MRS. ALLONBY.  No man does.  That is his.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What a delightful mood you are in to-night!  [_Turns
round and goes across with_ GERALD _to_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  _When he sees
her_, _he starts back in wonder_.  _Then slowly his eyes turn towards_
GERALD.]

GERALD.  Mother, this is Lord Illingworth, who has offered to take me as
his private secretary.  [MRS. ARBUTHNOT _bows coldly_.]  It is a
wonderful opening for me, isn’t it?  I hope he won’t be disappointed in
me, that is all.  You’ll thank Lord Illingworth, mother, won’t you?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Lord Illingworth in very good, I am sure, to interest
himself in you for the moment.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  [_Putting his hand on_ GERALD’S _shoulder_.]  Oh,
Gerald and I are great friends already, Mrs . . . Arbuthnot.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  There can be nothing in common between you and my son,
Lord Illingworth.

GERALD.  Dear mother, how can you say so?  Of course Lord Illingworth is
awfully clever and that sort of thing.  There is nothing Lord Illingworth
doesn’t know.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  My dear boy!

GERALD.  He knows more about life than any one I have ever met.  I feel
an awful duffer when I am with you, Lord Illingworth.  Of course, I have
had so few advantages.  I have not been to Eton or Oxford like other
chaps.  But Lord Illingworth doesn’t seem to mind that.  He has been
awfully good to me, mother.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Lord Illingworth may change his mind.  He may not really
want you as his secretary.

GERALD.  Mother!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  You must remember, as you said yourself, you have had so
few advantages.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Lord Illingworth, I want to speak to you for a moment.  Do
come over.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Will you excuse me, Mrs. Arbuthnot?  Now, don’t let
your charming mother make any more difficulties, Gerald.  The thing is
quite settled, isn’t it?

GERALD.  I hope so.  [LORD ILLINGWORTH _goes across to_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  I thought you were never going to leave the lady in black
velvet.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  She is excessively handsome.  [_Looks at_ MRS.
ARBUTHNOT.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Caroline, shall we all make a move to the music-room?
Miss Worsley is going to play.  You’ll come too, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot,
won’t you?  You don’t know what a treat is in store for you.  [_To_
DOCTOR BAUBENY.]  I must really take Miss Worsley down some afternoon to
the rectory.  I should so much like dear Mrs. Daubeny to hear her on the
violin.  Ah, I forgot.  Dear Mrs. Daubeny’s hearing is a little
defective, is it not?

THE ARCHDEACON.  Her deafness is a great privation to her.  She can’t
even hear my sermons now.  She reads them at home.  But she has many
resources in herself, many resources.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  She reads a good deal, I suppose?

THE ARCHDEACON.  Just the very largest print.  The eyesight is rapidly
going.  But she’s never morbid, never morbid.

GERALD.  [_To_ LORD ILLINGWORTH.]  Do speak to my mother, Lord
Illingworth, before you go into the music-room.  She seems to think,
somehow, you don’t mean what you said to me.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Aren’t you coming?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  In a few moments.  Lady Hunstanton, if Mrs. Arbuthnot
would allow me, I would like to say a few words to her, and we will join
you later on.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, of course.  You will have a great deal to say to
her, and she will have a great deal to thank you for.  It is not every
son who gets such an offer, Mrs. Arbuthnot.  But I know you appreciate
that, dear.

LADY CAROLINE.  John!

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Now, don’t keep Mrs. Arbuthnot too long, Lord
Illingworth.  We can’t spare her.

[_Exit following the other guests_.  _Sound of violin heard from
music-room_.]

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  So that is our son, Rachel!  Well, I am very proud of
him.  He in a Harford, every inch of him.  By the way, why Arbuthnot,
Rachel?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  One name is as good as another, when one has no right to
any name.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I suppose so—but why Gerald?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  After a man whose heart I broke—after my father.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Well, Rachel, what in over is over.  All I have got to
say now in that I am very, very much pleased with our boy.  The world
will know him merely as my private secretary, but to me he will be
something very near, and very dear.  It is a curious thing, Rachel; my
life seemed to be quite complete.  It was not so.  It lacked something,
it lacked a son.  I have found my son now, I am glad I have found him.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  You have no right to claim him, or the smallest part of
him.  The boy is entirely mine, and shall remain mine.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  My dear Rachel, you have had him to yourself for over
twenty years.  Why not let me have him for a little now?  He is quite as
much mine as yours.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Are you talking of the child you abandoned?  Of the
child who, as far as you are concerned, might have died of hunger and of
want?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You forget, Rachel, it was you who left me.  It was
not I who left you.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I left you because you refused to give the child a name.
Before my son was born, I implored you to marry me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I had no expectations then.  And besides, Rachel, I
wasn’t much older than you were.  I was only twenty-two.  I was
twenty-one, I believe, when the whole thing began in your father’s
garden.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  When a man is old enough to do wrong he should be old
enough to do right also.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  My dear Rachel, intellectual generalities are always
interesting, but generalities in morals mean absolutely nothing.  As for
saying I left our child to starve, that, of course, is untrue and silly.
My mother offered you six hundred a year.  But you wouldn’t take
anything.  You simply disappeared, and carried the child away with you.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I wouldn’t have accepted a penny from her.  Your father
was different.  He told you, in my presence, when we were in Paris, that
it was your duty to marry me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Oh, duty is what one expects from others, it is not
what one does oneself.  Of course, I was influenced by my mother.  Every
man is when he is young.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I am glad to hear you say so.  Gerald shall certainly
not go away with you.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What nonsense, Rachel!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Do you think I would allow my son—

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  _Our_ son.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  My son [LORD ILLINGWORTH _shrugs his shoulders_]—to go
away with the man who spoiled my youth, who ruined my life, who has
tainted every moment of my days?  You don’t realise what my past has been
in suffering and in shame.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  My dear Rachel, I must candidly say that I think
Gerald’s future considerably more important than your past.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald cannot separate his future from my past.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  That is exactly what he should do.  That is exactly
what you should help him to do.  What a typical woman you are!  You talk
sentimentally, and you are thoroughly selfish the whole time.  But don’t
let us have a scene.  Rachel, I want you to look at this matter from the
common-sense point of view, from the point of view of what is best for
our son, leaving you and me out of the question.  What is our son at
present?  An underpaid clerk in a small Provincial Bank in a third-rate
English town.  If you imagine he is quite happy in such a position, you
are mistaken.  He is thoroughly discontented.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He was not discontented till he met you.  You have made
him so.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Of course, I made him so.  Discontent is the first
step in the progress of a man or a nation.  But I did not leave him with
a mere longing for things he could not get.  No, I made him a charming
offer.  He jumped at it, I need hardly say.  Any young man would.  And
now, simply because it turns out that I am the boy’s own father and he my
own son, you propose practically to ruin his career.  That is to say, if
I were a perfect stranger, you would allow Gerald to go away with me, but
as he is my own flesh and blood you won’t.  How utterly illogical you
are!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I will not allow him to go.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  How can you prevent it?  What excuse can you give to
him for making him decline such an offer as mine?  I won’t tell him in
what relations I stand to him, I need hardly say.  But you daren’t tell
him.  You know that.  Look how you have brought him up.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I have brought him up to be a good man.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Quite so.  And what is the result?  You have educated
him to be your judge if he ever finds you out.  And a bitter, an unjust
judge he will be to you.  Don’t be deceived, Rachel.  Children begin by
loving their parents.  After a time they judge them.  Rarely, if ever, do
they forgive them.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  George, don’t take my son away from me.  I have had
twenty years of sorrow, and I have only had one thing to love me, only
one thing to love.  You have had a life of joy, and pleasure, and
success.  You have been quite happy, you have never thought of us.  There
was no reason, according to your views of life, why you should have
remembered us at all.  Your meeting us was a mere accident, a horrible
accident.  Forget it.  Don’t come now, and rob me of . . . of all I have
in the whole world.  You are so rich in other things.  Leave me the
little vineyard of my life; leave me the walled-in garden and the well of
water; the ewe-lamb God sent me, in pity or in wrath, oh! leave me that.
George, don’t take Gerald from me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Rachel, at the present moment you are not necessary to
Gerald’s career; I am.  There is nothing more to be said on the subject.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I will not let him go.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Here is Gerald.  He has a right to decide for himself.

[_Enter_ GERALD.]

GERALD.  Well, dear mother, I hope you have settled it all with Lord
Illingworth?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I have not, Gerald.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Your mother seems not to like your coming with me, for
some reason.

GERALD.  Why, mother?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I thought you were quite happy here with me, Gerald.  I
didn’t know you were so anxious to leave me.

GERALD.  Mother, how can you talk like that?  Of course I have been quite
happy with you.  But a man can’t stay always with his mother.  No chap
does.  I want to make myself a position, to do something.  I thought you
would have been proud to see me Lord Illingworth’s secretary.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I do not think you would be suitable as a private
secretary to Lord Illingworth.  You have no qualifications.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I don’t wish to seem to interfere for a moment, Mrs.
Arbuthnot, but as far as your last objection is concerned, I surely am
the best judge.  And I can only tell you that your son has all the
qualifications I had hoped for.  He has more, in fact, than I had even
thought of.  Far more.  [MRS. ARBUTHNOT _remains silent_.]  Have you any
other reason, Mrs. Arbuthnot, why you don’t wish your son to accept this
post?

GERALD.  Have you, mother?  Do answer.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  If you have, Mrs. Arbuthnot, pray, pray say it.  We
are quite by ourselves here.  Whatever it is, I need not say I will not
repeat it.

GERALD.  Mother?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  If you would like to be alone with your son, I will
leave you.  You may have some other reason you don’t wish me to hear.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I have no other reason.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Then, my dear boy, we may look on the thing as
settled.  Come, you and I will smoke a cigarette on the terrace together.
And Mrs. Arbuthnot, pray let me tell you, that I think you have acted
very, very wisely.

[_Exit with_ GERALD.  MRS. ARBUTHNOT _is left alone_.  _She stands
immobile with a look of unutterable sorrow on her face_.]

                                 ACT DROP




THIRD ACT


                                  SCENE

    _The Picture Gallery at Hunstanton_.  _Door at back leading on to
                                terrace_.

[LORD ILLINGWORTH _and_ GERALD, R.C.  LORD ILLINGWORTH _lolling on a
sofa_.  GERALD _in a chair_.]

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Thoroughly sensible woman, your mother, Gerald.  I
knew she would come round in the end.

GERALD.  My mother is awfully conscientious, Lord Illingworth, and I know
she doesn’t think I am educated enough to be your secretary.  She is
perfectly right, too.  I was fearfully idle when I was at school, and I
couldn’t pass an examination now to save my life.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  My dear Gerald, examinations are of no value
whatsoever.  If a man is a gentleman, he knows quite enough, and if he is
not a gentleman, whatever he knows is bad for him.

GERALD.  But I am so ignorant of the world, Lord Illingworth.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Don’t be afraid, Gerald.  Remember that you’ve got on
your side the most wonderful thing in the world—youth!  There is nothing
like youth.  The middle-aged are mortgaged to Life.  The old are in
life’s lumber-room.  But youth is the Lord of Life.  Youth has a kingdom
waiting for it.  Every one is born a king, and most people die in exile,
like most kings.  To win back my youth, Gerald, there is nothing I
wouldn’t do—except take exercise, get up early, or be a useful member of
the community.

GERALD.  But you don’t call yourself old, Lord Illingworth?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I am old enough to be your father, Gerald.

GERALD.  I don’t remember my father; he died years ago.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  So Lady Hunstanton told me.

GERALD.  It is very curious, my mother never talks to me about my father.
I sometimes think she must have married beneath her.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  [_Winces slightly_.]  Really?  [_Goes over and puts
his hand on_ GERALD’S _shoulder_.]  You have missed not having a father,
I suppose, Gerald?

GERALD.  Oh, no; my mother has been so good to me.  No one ever had such
a mother as I have had.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I am quite sure of that.  Still I should imagine that
most mothers don’t quite understand their sons.  Don’t realise, I mean,
that a son has ambitions, a desire to see life, to make himself a name.
After all, Gerald, you couldn’t be expected to pass all your life in such
a hole as Wrockley, could you?

GERALD.  Oh, no!  It would be dreadful!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  A mother’s love is very touching, of course, but it is
often curiously selfish.  I mean, there is a good deal of selfishness in
it.

GERALD.  [_Slowly_.]  I suppose there is.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Your mother is a thoroughly good woman.  But good
women have such limited views of life, their horizon is so small, their
interests are so petty, aren’t they?

GERALD.  They are awfully interested, certainly, in things we don’t care
much about.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I suppose your mother is very religious, and that sort
of thing.

GERALD.  Oh, yes, she’s always going to church.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Ah! she is not modern, and to be modern is the only
thing worth being nowadays.  You want to be modern, don’t you, Gerald?
You want to know life as it really is.  Not to be put of with any
old-fashioned theories about life.  Well, what you have to do at present
is simply to fit yourself for the best society.  A man who can dominate a
London dinner-table can dominate the world.  The future belongs to the
dandy.  It is the exquisites who are going to rule.

GERALD.  I should like to wear nice things awfully, but I have always
been told that a man should not think too much about his clothes.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  People nowadays are so absolutely superficial that
they don’t understand the philosophy of the superficial.  By the way,
Gerald, you should learn how to tie your tie better.  Sentiment is all
very well for the button-hole.  But the essential thing for a necktie is
style.  A well-tied tie is the first serious step in life.

GERALD.  [_Laughing_.]  I might be able to learn how to tie a tie, Lord
Illingworth, but I should never be able to talk as you do.  I don’t know
how to talk.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Oh! talk to every woman as if you loved her, and to
every man as if he bored you, and at the end of your first season you
will have the reputation of possessing the most perfect social tact.

GERALD.  But it is very difficult to get into society isn’t it?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  To get into the best society, nowadays, one has either
to feed people, amuse people, or shock people—that is all!

GERALD.  I suppose society is wonderfully delightful!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  To be in it is merely a bore.  But to be out of it
simply a tragedy.  Society is a necessary thing.  No man has any real
success in this world unless he has got women to back him, and women rule
society.  If you have not got women on your side you are quite over.  You
might just as well be a barrister, or a stockbroker, or a journalist at
once.

GERALD.  It is very difficult to understand women, is it not?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You should never try to understand them.  Women are
pictures.  Men are problems.  If you want to know what a woman really
means—which, by the way, is always a dangerous thing to do—look at her,
don’t listen to her.

GERALD.  But women are awfully clever, aren’t they?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  One should always tell them so.  But, to the
philosopher, my dear Gerald, women represent the triumph of matter over
mind—just as men represent the triumph of mind over morals.

GERALD.  How then can women have so much power as you say they have?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  The history of women is the history of the worst form
of tyranny the world has ever known.  The tyranny of the weak over the
strong.  It is the only tyranny that lasts.

GERALD.  But haven’t women got a refining influence?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Nothing refines but the intellect.

GERALD.  Still, there are many different kinds of women, aren’t there?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Only two kinds in society: the plain and the coloured.

GERALD.  But there are good women in society, aren’t there?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Far too many.

GERALD.  But do you think women shouldn’t be good?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  One should never tell them so, they’d all become good
at once.  Women are a fascinatingly wilful sex.  Every woman is a rebel,
and usually in wild revolt against herself.

GERALD.  You have never been married, Lord Illingworth, have you?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Men marry because they are tired; women because they
are curious.  Both are disappointed.

GERALD.  But don’t you think one can be happy when one is married?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Perfectly happy.  But the happiness of a married man,
my dear Gerald, depends on the people he has not married.

GERALD.  But if one is in love?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  One should always be in love.  That is the reason one
should never marry.

GERALD.  Love is a very wonderful thing, isn’t it?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  When one is in love one begins by deceiving oneself.
And one ends by deceiving others.  That is what the world calls a
romance.  But a really _grande passion_ is comparatively rare nowadays.
It is the privilege of people who have nothing to do.  That is the one
use of the idle classes in a country, and the only possible explanation
of us Harfords.

GERALD.  Harfords, Lord Illingworth?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  That is my family name.  You should study the Peerage,
Gerald.  It is the one book a young man about town should know
thoroughly, and it is the best thing in fiction the English have ever
done.  And now, Gerald, you are going into a perfectly new life with me,
and I want you to know how to live.  [MRS. ARBUTHNOT _appears on terrace
behind_.]  For the world has been made by fools that wise men should live
in it!

[_Enter_ L.C. LADY HUNSTANTON _and_ DR. DAUBENY.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! here you are, dear Lord Illingworth.  Well, I
suppose you have been telling our young friend, Gerald, what his new
duties are to be, and giving him a great deal of good advice over a
pleasant cigarette.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I have been giving him the best of advice, Lady
Hunstanton, and the best of cigarettes.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I am so sorry I was not here to listen to you, but I
suppose I am too old now to learn.  Except from you, dear Archdeacon,
when you are in your nice pulpit.  But then I always know what you are
going to say, so I don’t feel alarmed.  [_Sees_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]  Ah!
dear Mrs. Arbuthnot, do come and join us.  Come, dear.  [_Enter_ MRS.
ARBUTHNOT.]  Gerald has been having such a long talk with Lord
Illingworth; I am sure you must feel very much flattered at the pleasant
way in which everything has turned out for him.  Let us sit down.  [_They
sit down_.]  And how is your beautiful embroidery going on?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I am always at work, Lady Hunstanton.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Mrs. Daubeny embroiders a little, too, doesn’t she?

THE ARCHDEACON.  She was very deft with her needle once, quite a Dorcas.
But the gout has crippled her fingers a good deal.  She has not touched
the tambour frame for nine or ten years.  But she has many other
amusements.  She is very much interested in her own health.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! that is always a nice distraction, in it not?  Now,
what are you talking about, Lord Illingworth?  Do tell us.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I was on the point of explaining to Gerald that the
world has always laughed at its own tragedies, that being the only way in
which it has been able to bear them.  And that, consequently, whatever
the world has treated seriously belongs to the comedy side of things.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Now I am quite out of my depth.  I usually am when Lord
Illingworth says anything.  And the Humane Society is most careless.
They never rescue me.  I am left to sink.  I have a dim idea, dear Lord
Illingworth, that you are always on the side of the sinners, and I know I
always try to be on the side of the saints, but that is as far as I get.
And after all, it may be merely the fancy of a drowning person.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  The only difference between the saint and the sinner
is that every saint has a past, and every sinner has a future.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! that quite does for me.  I haven’t a word to say.
You and I, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot, are behind the age.  We can’t follow Lord
Illingworth.  Too much care was taken with our education, I am afraid.
To have been well brought up is a great drawback nowadays.  It shuts one
out from so much.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I should be sorry to follow Lord Illingworth in any of
his opinions.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You are quite right, dear.

[GERALD _shrugs his shoulders and looks irritably over at his mother_.
_Enter_ LADY CAROLINE.]

LADY CAROLINE.  Jane, have you seen John anywhere?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You needn’t be anxious about him, dear.  He is with
Lady Stutfield; I saw them some time ago, in the Yellow Drawing-room.
They seem quite happy together.  You are not going, Caroline?  Pray sit
down.

LADY CAROLINE.  I think I had better look after John.

[_Exit_ LADY CAROLINE.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  It doesn’t do to pay men so much attention.  And
Caroline has really nothing to be anxious about.  Lady Stutfield is very
sympathetic.  She is just as sympathetic about one thing as she is about
another.  A beautiful nature.

[_Enter_ SIR JOHN _and_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

Ah! here is Sir John!  And with Mrs. Allonby too!  I suppose it was Mrs.
Allonby I saw him with.  Sir John, Caroline has been looking everywhere
for you.

MRS. ALLONBY.  We have been waiting for her in the Music-room, dear Lady
Hunstanton.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! the Music-room, of course.  I thought it was the
Yellow Drawing-room, my memory is getting so defective.  [_To the_
ARCHDEACON.]  Mrs. Daubeny has a wonderful memory, hasn’t she?

THE ARCHDEACON.  She used to be quite remarkable for her memory, but
since her last attack she recalls chiefly the events of her early
childhood.  But she finds great pleasure in such retrospections, great
pleasure.

[_Enter_ LADY STUTFIELD _and_ MR. KELVIL.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! dear Lady Stutfield! and what has Mr. Kelvil been
talking to you about?

LADY STUTFIELD.  About Bimetallism, as well as I remember.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Bimetallism!  Is that quite a nice subject?  However, I
know people discuss everything very freely nowadays.  What did Sir John
talk to you about, dear Mrs. Allonby?

MRS. ALLONBY.  About Patagonia.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Really?  What a remote topic!  But very improving, I
have no doubt.

MRS. ALLONBY.  He has been most interesting on the subject of Patagonia.
Savages seem to have quite the same views as cultured people on almost
all subjects.  They are excessively advanced.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  What do they do?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Apparently everything.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Well, it is very gratifying, dear Archdeacon, is it
not, to find that Human Nature is permanently one.—On the whole, the
world is the same world, is it not?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  The world is simply divided into two classes—those who
believe the incredible, like the public—and those who do the improbable—

MRS. ALLONBY.  Like yourself?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Yes; I am always astonishing myself.  It is the only
thing that makes life worth living.

LADY STUTFIELD.  And what have you been doing lately that astonishes you?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I have been discovering all kinds of beautiful
qualities in my own nature.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah! don’t become quite perfect all at once.  Do it
gradually!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I don’t intend to grow perfect at all.  At least, I
hope I shan’t.  It would be most inconvenient.  Women love us for our
defects.  If we have enough of them, they will forgive us everything,
even our gigantic intellects.

MRS. ALLONBY.  It is premature to ask us to forgive analysis.  We forgive
adoration; that is quite as much as should be expected from us.

[_Enter_ LORD ALFRED.  _He joins_ LADY STUTFIELD.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! we women should forgive everything, shouldn’t we,
dear Mrs. Arbuthnot?  I am sure you agree with me in that.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I do not, Lady Hunstanton.  I think there are many
things women should never forgive.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  What sort of things?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  The ruin of another woman’s life.

[_Moves slowly away to back of stage_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! those things are very sad, no doubt, but I believe
there are admirable homes where people of that kind are looked after and
reformed, and I think on the whole that the secret of life is to take
things very, very easily.

MRS. ALLONBY.  The secret of life is never to have an emotion that is
unbecoming.

LADY STUTFIELD.  The secret of life is to appreciate the pleasure of
being terribly, terribly deceived.

KELVIL.  The secret of life is to resist temptation, Lady Stutfield.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  There is no secret of life.  Life’s aim, if it has
one, is simply to be always looking for temptations.  There are not
nearly enough.  I sometimes pass a whole day without coming across a
single one.  It is quite dreadful.  It makes one so nervous about the
future.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_Shakes her fan at him_.]  I don’t know how it is,
dear Lord Illingworth, but everything you have said to-day seems to me
excessively immoral.  It has been most interesting, listening to you.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  All thought is immoral.  Its very essence is
destruction.  If you think of anything, you kill it.  Nothing survives
being thought of.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I don’t understand a word, Lord Illingworth.  But I
have no doubt it is all quite true.  Personally, I have very little to
reproach myself with, on the score of thinking.  I don’t believe in women
thinking too much.  Women should think in moderation, as they should do
all things in moderation.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Moderation is a fatal thing, Lady Hunstanton.  Nothing
succeeds like excess.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I hope I shall remember that.  It sounds an admirable
maxim.  But I’m beginning to forget everything.  It’s a great misfortune.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is one of your most fascinating qualities, Lady
Hunstanton.  No woman should have a memory.  Memory in a woman is the
beginning of dowdiness.  One can always tell from a woman’s bonnet
whether she has got a memory or not.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  How charming you are, dear Lord Illingworth.  You
always find out that one’s most glaring fault is one’s most important
virtue.  You have the most comforting views of life.

[_Enter_ FARQUHAR.]

FARQUHAR.  Doctor Daubeny’s carriage!

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear Archdeacon!  It is only half-past ten.

THE ARCHDEACON.  [_Rising_.]  I am afraid I must go, Lady Hunstanton.
Tuesday is always one of Mrs. Daubeny’s bad nights.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_Rising_.]  Well, I won’t keep you from her.  [_Goes
with him towards door_.]  I have told Farquhar to put a brace of
partridge into the carriage.  Mrs. Daubeny may fancy them.

THE ARCHDEACON.  It is very kind of you, but Mrs. Daubeny never touches
solids now.  Lives entirely on jellies.  But she is wonderfully cheerful,
wonderfully cheerful.  She has nothing to complain of.

[_Exit with_ LADY HUNSTANTON.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  [_Goes over to_ LORD ILLINGWORTH.]  There is a beautiful
moon to-night.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Let us go and look at it.  To look at anything that is
inconstant is charming nowadays.

MRS. ALLONBY.  You have your looking-glass.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is unkind.  It merely shows me my wrinkles.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Mine is better behaved.  It never tells me the truth.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Then it is in love with you.

[_Exeunt_ SIR JOHN, LADY STUTFIELD, MR. KELVIL _and_ LORD ALFRED.]

GERALD.  [_To_ LORD ILLINGWORTH]  May I come too?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Do, my dear boy.  [_Moves towards with_ MRS. ALLONBY
_and_ GERALD.]

[LADY CAROLINE _enters_, _looks rapidly round and goes off in opposite
direction to that taken by_ SIR JOHN _and_ LADY STUTFIELD.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald!

GERALD.  What, mother!

[_Exit_ LORD ILLINGWORTH _with_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It is getting late.  Let us go home.

GERALD.  My dear mother.  Do let us wait a little longer.  Lord
Illingworth is so delightful, and, by the way, mother, I have a great
surprise for you.  We are starting for India at the end of this month.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Let us go home.

GERALD.  If you really want to, of course, mother, but I must bid
good-bye to Lord Illingworth first.  I’ll be back in five minutes.
[_Exit_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Let him leave me if he chooses, but not with him—not
with him!  I couldn’t bear it.  [_Walks up and down_.]

[_Enter_ HESTER.]

HESTER.  What a lovely night it is, Mrs. Arbuthnot.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Is it?

HESTER.  Mrs. Arbuthnot, I wish you would let us be friends.  You are so
different from the other women here.  When you came into the Drawing-room
this evening, somehow you brought with you a sense of what is good and
pure in life.  I had been foolish.  There are things that are right to
say, but that may be said at the wrong time and to the wrong people.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I heard what you said.  I agree with it, Miss Worsley.

HESTER.  I didn’t know you had heard it.  But I knew you would agree with
me.  A woman who has sinned should be punished, shouldn’t she?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Yes.

HESTER.  She shouldn’t be allowed to come into the society of good men
and women?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  She should not.

HESTER.  And the man should be punished in the same way?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  In the same way.  And the children, if there are
children, in the same way also?

HESTER.  Yes, it is right that the sins of the parents should be visited
on the children.  It is a just law.  It is God’s law.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It is one of God’s terrible laws.

[_Moves away to fireplace_.]

HESTER.  You are distressed about your son leaving you, Mrs. Arbuthnot?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Yes.

HESTER.  Do you like him going away with Lord Illingworth?  Of course
there is position, no doubt, and money, but position and money are not
everything, are they?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  They are nothing; they bring misery.

HESTER.  Then why do you let your son go with him?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He wishes it himself.

HESTER.  But if you asked him he would stay, would he not?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He has set his heart on going.

HESTER.  He couldn’t refuse you anything.  He loves you too much.  Ask
him to stay.  Let me send him in to you.  He is on the terrace at this
moment with Lord Illingworth.  I heard them laughing together as I passed
through the Music-room.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Don’t trouble, Miss Worsley, I can wait.  It is of no
consequence.

HESTER.  No, I’ll tell him you want him.  Do—do ask him to stay.  [_Exit_
HESTER.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He won’t come—I know he won’t come.

[Enter LADY CAROLINE.  _She looks round anxiously_.  _Enter_ GERALD.]

LADY CAROLINE.  Mr. Arbuthnot, may I ask you is Sir John anywhere on the
terrace?

GERALD.  No, Lady Caroline, he is not on the terrace.

LADY CAROLINE.  It is very curious.  It is time for him to retire.

[_Exit_ LADY CAROLINE.]

GERALD.  Dear mother, I am afraid I kept you waiting.  I forgot all about
it.  I am so happy to-night, mother; I have never been so happy.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  At the prospect of going away?

GERALD.  Don’t put it like that, mother.  Of course I am sorry to leave
you.  Why, you are the best mother in the whole world.  But after all, as
Lord Illingworth says, it is impossible to live in such a place as
Wrockley.  You don’t mind it.  But I’m ambitions; I want something more
than that.  I want to have a career.  I want to do something that will
make you proud of me, and Lord Illingworth is going to help me.  He is
going to do everything for me.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald, don’t go away with Lord Illingworth.  I implore
you not to.  Gerald, I beg you!

GERALD.  Mother, how changeable you are!  You don’t seem to know your own
mind for a single moment.  An hour and a half ago in the Drawing-room you
agreed to the whole thing; now you turn round and make objections, and
try to force me to give up my one chance in life.  Yes, my one chance.
You don’t suppose that men like Lord Illingworth are to be found every
day, do you, mother?  It is very strange that when I have had such a
wonderful piece of good luck, the one person to put difficulties in my
way should be my own mother.  Besides, you know, mother, I love Hester
Worsley.  Who could help loving her?  I love her more than I have ever
told you, far more.  And if I had a position, if I had prospects, I
could—I could ask her to—Don’t you understand now, mother, what it means
to me to be Lord Illingworth’s secretary?  To start like that is to find
a career ready for one—before one—waiting for one.  If I were Lord
Illingworth’s secretary I could ask Hester to be my wife.  As a wretched
bank clerk with a hundred a year it would be an impertinence.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I fear you need have no hopes of Miss Worsley.  I know
her views on life.  She has just told them to me.  [_A pause_.]

GERALD.  Then I have my ambition left, at any rate.  That is something—I
am glad I have that!  You have always tried to crush my ambition,
mother—haven’t you?  You have told me that the world is a wicked place,
that success is not worth having, that society is shallow, and all that
sort of thing—well, I don’t believe it, mother.  I think the world must
be delightful.  I think society must be exquisite.  I think success is a
thing worth having.  You have been wrong in all that you taught me,
mother, quite wrong.  Lord Illingworth is a successful man.  He is a
fashionable man.  He is a man who lives in the world and for it.  Well, I
would give anything to be just like Lord Illingworth.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I would sooner see you dead.

GERALD.  Mother, what is your objection to Lord Illingworth?  Tell
me—tell me right out.  What is it?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He is a bad man.

GERALD.  In what way bad?  I don’t understand what you mean.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I will tell you.

GERALD.  I suppose you think him bad, because he doesn’t believe the same
things as you do.  Well, men are different from women, mother.  It is
natural that they should have different views.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It is not what Lord Illingworth believes, or what he
does not believe, that makes him bad.  It is what he is.

GERALD.  Mother, is it something you know of him?  Something you actually
know?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It is something I know.

GERALD.  Something you are quite sure of?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Quite sure of.

GERALD.  How long have you known it?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  For twenty years.

GERALD.  Is it fair to go back twenty years in any man’s career?  And
what have you or I to do with Lord Illingworth’s early life?  What
business is it of ours?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  What this man has been, he is now, and will be always.

GERALD.  Mother, tell me what Lord Illingworth did?  If he did anything
shameful, I will not go away with him.  Surely you know me well enough
for that?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald, come near to me.  Quite close to me, as you used
to do when you were a little boy, when you were mother’s own boy.
[GERALD _sits down betide his mother_.  _She runs her fingers through his
hair_, _and strokes his hands_.]  Gerald, there was a girl once, she was
very young, she was little over eighteen at the time.  George
Harford—that was Lord Illingworth’s name then—George Harford met her.
She knew nothing about life.  He—knew everything.  He made this girl love
him.  He made her love him so much that she left her father’s house with
him one morning.  She loved him so much, and he had promised to marry
her!  He had solemnly promised to marry her, and she had believed him.
She was very young, and—and ignorant of what life really is.  But he put
the marriage off from week to week, and month to month.—She trusted in
him all the while.  She loved him.—Before her child was born—for she had
a child—she implored him for the child’s sake to marry her, that the
child might have a name, that her sin might not be visited on the child,
who was innocent.  He refused.  After the child was born she left him,
taking the child away, and her life was ruined, and her soul ruined, and
all that was sweet, and good, and pure in her ruined also.  She suffered
terribly—she suffers now.  She will always suffer.  For her there is no
joy, no peace, no atonement.  She is a woman who drags a chain like a
guilty thing.  She is a woman who wears a mask, like a thing that is a
leper.  The fire cannot purify her.  The waters cannot quench her
anguish.  Nothing can heal her! no anodyne can give her sleep! no poppies
forgetfulness!  She is lost!  She is a lost soul!—That is why I call Lord
Illingworth a bad man.  That is why I don’t want my boy to be with him.

GERALD.  My dear mother, it all sounds very tragic, of course.  But I
dare say the girl was just as much to blame as Lord Illingworth
was.—After all, would a really nice girl, a girl with any nice feelings
at all, go away from her home with a man to whom she was not married, and
live with him as his wife?  No nice girl would.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_After a pause_.]  Gerald, I withdraw all my
objections.  You are at liberty to go away with Lord Illingworth, when
and where you choose.

GERALD.  Dear mother, I knew you wouldn’t stand in my way.  You are the
best woman God ever made.  And, as for Lord Illingworth, I don’t believe
he is capable of anything infamous or base.  I can’t believe it of him—I
can’t.

HESTER.  [_Outside_.]  Let me go!  Let me go!  [_Enter_ HESTER _in
terror_, _and rushes over to_ GERALD _and flings herself in his arms_.]

HESTER.  Oh! save me—save me from him!

GERALD.  From whom?

HESTER.  He has insulted me!  Horribly insulted me!  Save me!

GERALD.  Who?  Who has dared—?

[LORD ILLINGWORTH _enters at back of stage_.  HESTER _breaks from_
GERALD’S _arms and points to him_.]

GERALD  [_He is quite beside himself with rage and indignation_.]  Lord
Illingworth, you have insulted the purest thing on God’s earth, a thing
as pure as my own mother.  You have insulted the woman I love most in the
world with my own mother.  As there is a God in Heaven, I will kill you!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_Rushing across and catching hold of him_]  No! no!

GERALD.  [_Thrusting her back_.]  Don’t hold me, mother.  Don’t hold
me—I’ll kill him!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald!

GERALD.  Let me go, I say!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Stop, Gerald, stop!  He is your own father!

[GERALD _clutches his mother’s hands and looks into her face_.  _She
sinks slowly on the ground in shame_.  HESTER _steals towards the door_.
LORD ILLINGWORTH _frowns and bites his lip_.  _After a time_ GERALD
_raises his mother up_, _puts his am round her_, _and leads her from the
room_.]

                                 ACT DROP




FOURTH ACT


                                  SCENE

_Sitting-room at Mrs. Arbuthnot’s_.  _Large open French window at back_,
_looking on to garden_.  _Doors_ R.C. _and_ L.C.

[GERALD ARBUTHNOT _writing at table_.]

[_Enter_ ALICE R.C. _followed by_ LADY HUNSTANTON _and_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

ALICE.  Lady Hunstanton and Mrs. Allonby.

[_Exit_ L.C.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Good morning, Gerald.

GERALD.  [_Rising_.]  Good morning, Lady Hunstanton.  Good morning, Mrs.
Allonby.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_Sitting down_.]  We came to inquire for your dear
mother, Gerald.  I hope she is better?

GERALD.  My mother has not come down yet, Lady Hunstanton.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, I am afraid the heat was too much for her last
night.  I think there must have been thunder in the air.  Or perhaps it
was the music.  Music makes one feel so romantic—at least it always gets
on one’s nerves.

MRS. ALLONBY.  It’s the same thing, nowadays.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I am so glad I don’t know what you mean, dear.  I am
afraid you mean something wrong.  Ah, I see you’re examining Mrs.
Arbuthnot’s pretty room.  Isn’t it nice and old-fashioned?

MRS. ALLONBY.  [_Surveying the room through her lorgnette_.]  It looks
quite the happy English home.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  That’s just the word, dear; that just describes it.
One feels your mother’s good influence in everything she has about her,
Gerald.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Lord Illingworth says that all influence is bad, but that
a good influence is the worst in the world.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  When Lord Illingworth knows Mrs. Arbuthnot better he
will change his mind.  I must certainly bring him here.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I should like to see Lord Illingworth in a happy English
home.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  It would do him a great deal of good, dear.  Most women
in London, nowadays, seem to furnish their rooms with nothing but
orchids, foreigners, and French novels.  But here we have the room of a
sweet saint.  Fresh natural flowers, books that don’t shock one, pictures
that one can look at without blushing.

MRS. ALLONBY.  But I like blushing.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Well, there _is_ a good deal to be said for blushing,
if one can do it at the proper moment.  Poor dear Hunstanton used to tell
me I didn’t blush nearly often enough.  But then he was so very
particular.  He wouldn’t let me know any of his men friends, except those
who were over seventy, like poor Lord Ashton: who afterwards, by the way,
was brought into the Divorce Court.  A most unfortunate case.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I delight in men over seventy.  They always offer one the
devotion of a lifetime.  I think seventy an ideal age for a man.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  She is quite incorrigible, Gerald, isn’t she?
By-the-by, Gerald, I hope your dear mother will come and see me more
often now.  You and Lord Illingworth start almost immediately, don’t you?

GERALD.  I have given up my intention of being Lord Illingworth’s
secretary.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Surely not, Gerald!  It would be most unwise of you.
What reason can you have?

GERALD.  I don’t think I should be suitable for the post.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I wish Lord Illingworth would ask me to be his secretary.
But he says I am not serious enough.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear, you really mustn’t talk like that in this
house.  Mrs. Arbuthnot doesn’t know anything about the wicked society in
which we all live.  She won’t go into it.  She is far too good.  I
consider it was a great honour her coming to me last night.  It gave
quite an atmosphere of respectability to the party.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, that must have been what you thought was thunder in
the air.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear, how can you say that?  There is no resemblance
between the two things at all.  But really, Gerald, what do you mean by
not being suitable?

GERALD.  Lord Illingworth’s views of life and mine are too different.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  But, my dear Gerald, at your age you shouldn’t have any
views of life.  They are quite out of place.  You must be guided by
others in this matter.  Lord Illingworth has made you the most flattering
offer, and travelling with him you would see the world—as much of it, at
least, as one should look at—under the best auspices possible, and stay
with all the right people, which is so important at this solemn moment in
your career.

GERALD.  I don’t want to see the world: I’ve seen enough of it.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I hope you don’t think you have exhausted life, Mr.
Arbuthnot.  When a man says that, one knows that life has exhausted him.

GERALD.  I don’t wish to leave my mother.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Now, Gerald, that is pure laziness on your part.  Not
leave your mother!  If I were your mother I would insist on your going.

[_Enter_ ALICE L.C.]

ALICE.  Mrs. Arbuthnot’s compliments, my lady, but she has a bad
headache, and cannot see any one this morning.  [_Exit_ R.C.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_Rising_.]  A bad headache!  I am so sorry!  Perhaps
you’ll bring her up to Hunstanton this afternoon, if she is better,
Gerald.

GERALD.  I am afraid not this afternoon, Lady Hunstanton.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Well, to-morrow, then.  Ah, if you had a father,
Gerald, he wouldn’t let you waste your life here.  He would send you off
with Lord Illingworth at once.  But mothers are so weak.  They give up to
their sons in everything.  We are all heart, all heart.  Come, dear, I
must call at the rectory and inquire for Mrs. Daubeny, who, I am afraid,
is far from well.  It is wonderful how the Archdeacon bears up, quite
wonderful.  He is the most sympathetic of husbands.  Quite a model.
Good-bye, Gerald, give my fondest love to your mother.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Good-bye, Mr. Arbuthnot.

GERALD.  Good-bye.

[_Exit_ LADY HUNSTANTON _and_ MRS. ALLONBY.  GERALD _sits down and reads
over his letter_.]

GERALD.  What name can I sign?  I, who have no right to any name.
[_Signs name_, _puts letter into envelope_, _addresses it_, _and is about
to seal it_, _when door_ L.C. _opens and_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT _enters_.
GERALD _lays down sealing-wax_.  _Mother and son look at each other_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_Through French window at the back_.]  Good-bye again,
Gerald.  We are taking the short cut across your pretty garden.  Now,
remember my advice to you—start at once with Lord Illingworth.

MRS. ALLONBY.  _Au revoir_, Mr. Arbuthnot.  Mind you bring me back
something nice from your travels—not an Indian shawl—on no account an
Indian shawl.

[_Exeunt_.]

GERALD.  Mother, I have just written to him.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  To whom?

GERALD.  To my father.  I have written to tell him to come here at four
o’clock this afternoon.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He shall not come here.  He shall not cross the
threshold of my house.

GERALD.  He must come.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald, if you are going away with Lord Illingworth, go
at once.  Go before it kills me: but don’t ask me to meet him.

GERALD.  Mother, you don’t understand.  Nothing in the world would induce
me to go away with Lord Illingworth, or to leave you.  Surely you know me
well enough for that.  No: I have written to him to say—

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  What can you have to say to him?

GERALD.  Can’t you guess, mother, what I have written in this letter?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  No.

GERALD.  Mother, surely you can.  Think, think what must be done, now, at
once, within the next few days.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  There is nothing to be done.

GERALD.  I have written to Lord Illingworth to tell him that he must
marry you.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Marry me?

GERALD.  Mother, I will force him to do it.  The wrong that has been done
you must be repaired.  Atonement must be made.  Justice may be slow,
mother, but it comes in the end.  In a few days you shall be Lord
Illingworth’s lawful wife.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  But, Gerald—

GERALD.  I will insist upon his doing it.  I will make him do it: he will
not dare to refuse.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  But, Gerald, it is I who refuse.  I will not marry Lord
Illingworth.

GERALD.  Not marry him?  Mother!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I will not marry him.

GERALD.  But you don’t understand: it is for your sake I am talking, not
for mine.  This marriage, this necessary marriage, this marriage which
for obvious reasons must inevitably take place, will not help me, will
not give me a name that will be really, rightly mine to bear.  But surely
it will be something for you, that you, my mother, should, however late,
become the wife of the man who is my father.  Will not that be something?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I will not marry him.

GERALD.  Mother, you must.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I will not.  You talk of atonement for a wrong done.
What atonement can be made to me?  There is no atonement possible.  I am
disgraced: he is not.  That is all.  It is the usual history of a man and
a woman as it usually happens, as it always happens.  And the ending is
the ordinary ending.  The woman suffers.  The man goes free.

GERALD.  I don’t know if that is the ordinary ending, mother: I hope it
is not.  But your life, at any rate, shall not end like that.  The man
shall make whatever reparation is possible.  It is not enough.  It does
not wipe out the past, I know that.  But at least it makes the future
better, better for you, mother.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I refuse to marry Lord Illingworth.

GERALD.  If he came to you himself and asked you to be his wife you would
give him a different answer.  Remember, he is my father.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  If he came himself, which he will not do, my answer
would be the same.  Remember I am your mother.

GERALD.  Mother, you make it terribly difficult for me by talking like
that; and I can’t understand why you won’t look at this matter from the
right, from the only proper standpoint.  It is to take away the
bitterness out of your life, to take away the shadow that lies on your
name, that this marriage must take place.  There is no alternative: and
after the marriage you and I can go away together.  But the marriage must
take place first.  It is a duty that you owe, not merely to yourself, but
to all other women—yes: to all the other women in the world, lest he
betray more.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I owe nothing to other women.  There is not one of them
to help me.  There is not one woman in the world to whom I could go for
pity, if I would take it, or for sympathy, if I could win it.  Women are
hard on each other.  That girl, last night, good though she is, fled from
the room as though I were a tainted thing.  She was right.  I am a
tainted thing.  But my wrongs are my own, and I will bear them alone.  I
must bear them alone.  What have women who have not sinned to do with me,
or I with them?  We do not understand each other.

[_Enter_ HESTER _behind_.]

GERALD.  I implore you to do what I ask you.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  What son has ever asked of his mother to make so hideous
a sacrifice?  None.

GERALD.  What mother has ever refused to marry the father of her own
child?  None.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Let me be the first, then.  I will not do it.

GERALD.  Mother, you believe in religion, and you brought me up to
believe in it also.  Well, surely your religion, the religion that you
taught me when I was a boy, mother, must tell you that I am right.  You
know it, you feel it.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I do not know it.  I do not feel it, nor will I ever
stand before God’s altar and ask God’s blessing on so hideous a mockery
as a marriage between me and George Harford.  I will not say the words
the Church bids us to say.  I will not say them.  I dare not.  How could
I swear to love the man I loathe, to honour him who wrought you
dishonour, to obey him who, in his mastery, made me to sin?  No: marriage
is a sacrament for those who love each other.  It is not for such as him,
or such as me.  Gerald, to save you from the world’s sneers and taunts I
have lied to the world.  For twenty years I have lied to the world.  I
could not tell the world the truth.  Who can, ever?  But not for my own
sake will I lie to God, and in God’s presence.  No, Gerald, no ceremony,
Church-hallowed or State-made, shall ever bind me to George Harford.  It
may be that I am too bound to him already, who, robbing me, yet left me
richer, so that in the mire of my life I found the pearl of price, or
what I thought would be so.

GERALD.  I don’t understand you now.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Men don’t understand what mothers are.  I am no
different from other women except in the wrong done me and the wrong I
did, and my very heavy punishments and great disgrace.  And yet, to bear
you I had to look on death.  To nurture you I had to wrestle with it.
Death fought with me for you.  All women have to fight with death to keep
their children.  Death, being childless, wants our children from us.
Gerald, when you were naked I clothed you, when you were hungry I gave
you food.  Night and day all that long winter I tended you.  No office is
too mean, no care too lowly for the thing we women love—and oh! how _I_
loved _you_.  Not Hannah, Samuel more.  And you needed love, for you were
weakly, and only love could have kept you alive.  Only love can keep any
one alive.  And boys are careless often and without thinking give pain,
and we always fancy that when they come to man’s estate and know us
better they will repay us.  But it is not so.  The world draws them from
our side, and they make friends with whom they are happier than they are
with us, and have amusements from which we are barred, and interests that
are not ours: and they are unjust to us often, for when they find life
bitter they blame us for it, and when they find it sweet we do not taste
its sweetness with them . . . You made many friends and went into their
houses and were glad with them, and I, knowing my secret, did not dare to
follow, but stayed at home and closed the door, shut out the sun and sat
in darkness.  What should I have done in honest households?  My past was
ever with me. . . . And you thought I didn’t care for the pleasant things
of life.  I tell you I longed for them, but did not dare to touch them,
feeling I had no right.  You thought I was happier working amongst the
poor.  That was my mission, you imagined.  It was not, but where else was
I to go?  The sick do not ask if the hand that smooths their pillow is
pure, nor the dying care if the lips that touch their brow have known the
kiss of sin.  It was you I thought of all the time; I gave to them the
love you did not need: lavished on them a love that was not theirs . . .
And you thought I spent too much of my time in going to Church, and in
Church duties.  But where else could I turn?  God’s house is the only
house where sinners are made welcome, and you were always in my heart,
Gerald, too much in my heart.  For, though day after day, at morn or
evensong, I have knelt in God’s house, I have never repented of my sin.
How could I repent of my sin when you, my love, were its fruit!  Even now
that you are bitter to me I cannot repent.  I do not.  You are more to me
than innocence.  I would rather be your mother—oh! much rather!—than have
been always pure . . . Oh, don’t you see? don’t you understand?  It is my
dishonour that has made you so dear to me.  It is my disgrace that has
bound you so closely to me.  It is the price I paid for you—the price of
soul and body—that makes me love you as I do.  Oh, don’t ask me to do
this horrible thing.  Child of my shame, be still the child of my shame!

GERALD.  Mother, I didn’t know you loved me so much as that.  And I will
be a better son to you than I have been.  And you and I must never leave
each other . . . but, mother . . . I can’t help it . . . you must become
my father’s wife.  You must marry him.  It is your duty.

HESTER.  [_Running forwards and embracing_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]  No, no; you
shall not.  That would be real dishonour, the first you have ever known.
That would be real disgrace: the first to touch you.  Leave him and come
with me.  There are other countries than England . . . Oh! other
countries over sea, better, wiser, and less unjust lands.  The world is
very wide and very big.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  No, not for me.  For me the world is shrivelled to a
palm’s breadth, and where I walk there are thorns.

HESTER.  It shall not be so.  We shall somewhere find green valleys and
fresh waters, and if we weep, well, we shall weep together.  Have we not
both loved him?

GERALD.  Hester!

HESTER.  [_Waving him back_.]  Don’t, don’t!  You cannot love me at all,
unless you love her also.  You cannot honour me, unless she’s holier to
you.  In her all womanhood is martyred.  Not she alone, but all of us are
stricken in her house.

GERALD.  Hester, Hester, what shall I do?

HESTER.  Do you respect the man who is your father?

GERALD.  Respect him?  I despise him!  He is infamous.

HESTER.  I thank you for saving me from him last night.

GERALD.  Ah, that is nothing.  I would die to save you.  But you don’t
tell me what to do now!

HESTER.  Have I not thanked you for saving _me_?

GERALD.  But what should I do?

HESTER.  Ask your own heart, not mine.  I never had a mother to save, or
shame.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He is hard—he is hard.  Let me go away.

GERALD.  [_Rushes over and kneels down bedside his mother_.]  Mother,
forgive me: I have been to blame.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Don’t kiss my hands: they are cold.  My heart is cold:
something has broken it.

HESTER.  Ah, don’t say that.  Hearts live by being wounded.  Pleasure may
turn a heart to stone, riches may make it callous, but sorrow—oh, sorrow
cannot break it.  Besides, what sorrows have you now?  Why, at this
moment you are more dear to him than ever, _dear_ though you have _been_,
and oh! how dear you _have_ been always.  Ah! be kind to him.

GERALD.  You are my mother and my father all in one.  I need no second
parent.  It was for you I spoke, for you alone.  Oh, say something,
mother.  Have I but found one love to lose another?  Don’t tell me that.
O mother, you are cruel.  [_Gets up and flings himself sobbing on a
sofa_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_To_ HESTER.]  But has he found indeed another love?

HESTER.  You know I have loved him always.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  But we are very poor.

HESTER.  Who, being loved, is poor?  Oh, no one.  I hate my riches.  They
are a burden.  Let him share it with me.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  But we are disgraced.  We rank among the outcasts Gerald
is nameless.  The sins of the parents should be visited on the children.
It is God’s law.

HESTER.  I was wrong.  God’s law is only Love.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_Rises_, _and taking_ HESTER _by the hand_, _goes
slowly over to where_ GERALD _is lying on the sofa with his head buried
in his hands_.  _She touches him and he looks up_.]  Gerald, I cannot
give you a father, but I have brought you a wife.

GERALD.  Mother, I am not worthy either of her or you.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  So she comes first, you are worthy.  And when you are
away, Gerald . . . with . . . her—oh, think of me sometimes.  Don’t
forget me.  And when you pray, pray for me.  We should pray when we are
happiest, and you will be happy, Gerald.

HESTER.  Oh, you don’t think of leaving us?

GERALD.  Mother, you won’t leave us?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I might bring shame upon you!

GERALD.  Mother!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  For a little then: and if you let me, near you always.

HESTER.  [_To_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]  Come out with us to the garden.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Later on, later on.  [_Exeunt_ HESTER _and_ GERALD.
MRS. ARBUTHNOT _goes towards door_ L.C.   _Stops at looking-glass over
mantelpiece and looks into it_.  _Enter_ ALICE R.C.]

ALICE.  A gentleman to see you, ma’am.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Say I am not at home.  Show me the card.  [_Takes card
from salver and looks at it_.]  Say I will not see him.

[LORD ILLINGWORTH _enters_.  MRS. ARBUTHNOT _sees him in the glass and
starts_, _but does not turn round_.  _Exit_ ALICE.]  What can you have to
say to me to-day, George Harford?  You can have nothing to say to me.
You must leave this house.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Rachel, Gerald knows everything about you and me now,
so some arrangement must be come to that will suit us all three.  I
assure you, he will find in me the most charming and generous of fathers.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  My son may come in at any moment.  I saved you last
night.  I may not be able to save you again.  My son feels my dishonour
strongly, terribly strongly.  I beg you to go.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  [_Sitting down_.]  Last night was excessively
unfortunate.  That silly Puritan girl making a scene merely because I
wanted to kiss her.  What harm is there in a kiss?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_Turning round_.]  A kiss may ruin a human life, George
Harford.  _I_ know that.  _I_ know that too well.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  We won’t discuss that at present.  What is of
importance to-day, as yesterday, is still our son.  I am extremely fond
of him, as you know, and odd though it may seem to you, I admired his
conduct last night immensely.  He took up the cudgels for that pretty
prude with wonderful promptitude.  He is just what I should have liked a
son of mine to be.  Except that no son of mine should ever take the side
of the Puritans: that is always an error.  Now, what I propose is this.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Lord Illingworth, no proposition of yours interests me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  According to our ridiculous English laws, I can’t
legitimise Gerald.  But I can leave him my property.  Illingworth is
entailed, of course, but it is a tedious barrack of a place.  He can have
Ashby, which is much prettier, Harborough, which has the best shooting in
the north of England, and the house in St. James Square.  What more can a
gentleman require in this world?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Nothing more, I am quite sure.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  As for a title, a title is really rather a nuisance in
these democratic days.  As George Harford I had everything I wanted.  Now
I have merely everything that other people want, which isn’t nearly so
pleasant.  Well, my proposal is this.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I told you I was not interested, and I beg you to go.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  The boy is to be with you for six months in the year,
and with me for the other six.  That is perfectly fair, is it not?  You
can have whatever allowance you like, and live where you choose.  As for
your past, no one knows anything about it except myself and Gerald.
There is the Puritan, of course, the Puritan in white muslin, but she
doesn’t count.  She couldn’t tell the story without explaining that she
objected to being kissed, could she?  And all the women would think her a
fool and the men think her a bore.  And you need not be afraid that
Gerald won’t be my heir.  I needn’t tell you I have not the slightest
intention of marrying.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  You come too late.  My son has no need of you.  You are
not necessary.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What do you mean, Rachel?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  That you are not necessary to Gerald’s career.  He does
not require you.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I do not understand you.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Look into the garden.  [LORD ILLINGWORTH _rises and goes
towards window_.]  You had better not let them see you: you bring
unpleasant memories.  [LORD ILLINGWORTH _looks out and starts_.]  She
loves him.  They love each other.  We are safe from you, and we are going
away.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Where?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  We will not tell you, and if you find us we will not
know you.  You seem surprised.  What welcome would you get from the girl
whose lips you tried to soil, from the boy whose life you have shamed,
from the mother whose dishonour comes from you?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You have grown hard, Rachel.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I was too weak once.  It is well for me that I have
changed.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I was very young at the time.  We men know life too
early.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  And we women know life too late.  That is the difference
between men and women.  [_A pause_.]

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Rachel, I want my son.  My money may be of no use to
him now.  I may be of no use to him, but I want my son.  Bring us
together, Rachel.  You can do it if you choose.  [_Sees letter on
table_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  There is no room in my boy’s life for you.  He is not
interested in _you_.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Then why does he write to me?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  What do you mean?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What letter is this?  [_Takes up letter_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  That—is nothing.  Give it to me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is addressed to _me_.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  You are not to open it.  I forbid you to open it.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  And in Gerald’s handwriting.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It was not to have been sent.  It is a letter he wrote
to you this morning, before he saw me.  But he is sorry now he wrote it,
very sorry.  You are not to open it.  Give it to me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It belongs to me.  [_Opens it_, _sits down and reads
it slowly_. MRS. ARBUTHNOT _watches him all the time_.]  You have read
this letter, I suppose, Rachel?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  No.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You know what is in it?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Yes!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I don’t admit for a moment that the boy is right in
what he says.  I don’t admit that it is any duty of mine to marry you.  I
deny it entirely.  But to get my son back I am ready—yes, I am ready to
marry you, Rachel—and to treat you always with the deference and respect
due to my wife.  I will marry you as soon as you choose.  I give you my
word of honour.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  You made that promise to me once before and broke it.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I will keep it now.  And that will show you that I
love my son, at least as much as you love him.  For when I marry you,
Rachel, there are some ambitions I shall have to surrender.  High
ambitions, too, if any ambition is high.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I decline to marry you, Lord Illingworth.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Are you serious?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Yes.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Do tell me your reasons.  They would interest me
enormously.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I have already explained them to my son.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I suppose they were intensely sentimental, weren’t
they?  You women live by your emotions and for them.  You have no
philosophy of life.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  You are right.  We women live by our emotions and for
them.  By our passions, and for them, if you will.  I have two passions,
Lord Illingworth: my love of him, my hate of you.  You cannot kill those.
They feed each other.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What sort of love is that which needs to have hate as
its brother?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It is the sort of love I have for Gerald.  Do you think
that terrible?  Well it is terrible.  All love is terrible.  All love is
a tragedy.  I loved you once, Lord Illingworth.  Oh, what a tragedy for a
woman to have loved you!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  So you really refuse to marry me?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Yes.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Because you hate me?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Yes.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  And does my son hate me as you do?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  No.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I am glad of that, Rachel.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He merely despises you.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What a pity!  What a pity for him, I mean.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Don’t be deceived, George.  Children begin by loving
their parents.  After a time they judge them.  Rarely if ever do they
forgive them.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  [_Reads letter over again_, _very slowly_.]  May I ask
by what arguments you made the boy who wrote this letter, this beautiful,
passionate letter, believe that you should not marry his father, the
father of your own child?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It was not I who made him see it.  It was another.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What _fin-de-siècle_ person?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  The Puritan, Lord Illingworth.  [_A pause_.]

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  [_Winces_, _then rises slowly and goes over to table
where his hat and gloves are_.  MRS. ARBUTHNOT _is standing close to the
table_.  _He picks up one of the gloves, and begins pulling it on_.]
There is not much then for me to do here, Rachel?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Nothing.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is good-bye, is it?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  For ever, I hope, this time, Lord Illingworth.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  How curious!  At this moment you look exactly as you
looked the night you left me twenty years ago.  You have just the same
expression in your mouth.  Upon my word, Rachel, no woman ever loved me
as you did.  Why, you gave yourself to me like a flower, to do anything I
liked with.  You were the prettiest of playthings, the most fascinating
of small romances . . . [_Pulls out watch_.]  Quarter to two!  Must be
strolling back to Hunstanton.  Don’t suppose I shall see you there again.
I’m sorry, I am, really.  It’s been an amusing experience to have met
amongst people of one’s own rank, and treated quite seriously too, one’s
mistress, and one’s—

[MRS. ARBUTHNOT _snatches up glove and strikes_ LORD ILLINGWORTH _across
the face with it_.  LORD ILLINGWORTH _starts_.  _He is dazed by the
insult of his punishment_.  _Then he controls himself_, _and goes to
window and looks out at his son_.  _Sighs and leaves the room_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_Falls sobbing on the sofa_.]  He would have said it.
He would have said it.

[_Enter_ GERALD _and_ HESTER _from the garden_.]

GERALD.  Well, dear mother.  You never came out after all.  So we have
come in to fetch you.  Mother, you have not been crying?  [_Kneels down
beside her_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  My boy!  My boy!  My boy!  [_Running her fingers through
his hair_.]

HESTER.  [_Coming over_.]  But you have two children now.  You’ll let me
be your daughter?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_Looking up_.]  Would you choose me for a mother?

HESTER.  You of all women I have ever known.

[_They move towards the door leading into garden with their arms round
each other’s waists_.  GERALD _goes to table_ L.C. _for his hat_.  _On
turning round he sees_ LORD ILLINGWORTH’S _glove lying on the floor_,
_and picks it up_.]

GERALD.  Hallo, mother, whose glove is this?  You have had a visitor.
Who was it?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_Turning round_.]  Oh! no one.  No one in particular.
A man of no importance.

                                 CURTAIN

